
<div class="lgc" style="margin-top:2em;margin-bottom:10em;"> <!-- rend=';' -->
<p class="line">DEDICATED</p>
<p class="line">TO</p>
<p class="line"><span style="font-size:larger">S. K. T.</span></p>
</div> <!-- end rend -->

<hr class="pbk" />

<p class="line" style="text-align:center;margin-top:3em;margin-bottom:2em;font-size:2.5em;">The Midlander</p>

<div><h1 class="nobreak">CHAPTER I</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="dropcap">P</span>EOPLE used to say of the two Oliphant brothers
that Harlan Oliphant looked as if he
lived in the Oliphants’ house, but Dan
didn’t. This was a poor sort of information to any
one who had never seen the house, but of course the
supposition was that everybody had seen it and was
familiar with its significance. It stood in a great,
fine yard, in that row of great, fine yards at the upper
end of National Avenue, before the avenue swung off
obliquely and changed its name to Amberson Boulevard.
The houses in the long row were such houses
as are built no more; bricklayers worked for a dollar
a day and the workman’s day was ten hours long
when National Avenue grew into its glory. Those
houses were of a big-walled solidity to withstand
time, fire, and tornado, but they found another assailant
not to be resisted by anything: this conqueror,
called Progress, being the growth of the city. Until
the growth came they were indomitable and fit for
the centuries.</p>

<p class="pindent">Moreover, they were of a dignified spaciousness not
now to be accomplished except by millionaires with
wives content to spend their days getting new servants.
The New Yorker, admitted to these interiors
upon a visit westward, discovered an amplitude
with which he had little familiarity at home,
where the brownstone fronts and squeezed apartments
showed him no such suites of big rooms; for,
of all the million people in New York, only a dozen
families could have houses comparable in size or
stateliness. “Stately” was the word, though here
some little care must be taken, of course, with an eye
to those who will not admit that anything short of
Blenheim or the Luxembourg is stately. The stateliness
of the Oliphants’ house was precisely the point
in that popular discrimination between the two young
men who lived there: Harlan Oliphant, like the
house, was supposed to partake of this high quality,
but stateliness was the last thing any one ever
thought of in connection with Dan.</p>

<p class="pindent">The youth of the brothers, in the happy and comfortable
nineties of the last century, is well remembered
in their city, where the Christmas holidays
could never be thought really begun till the two
Oliphants had arrived from college and their broad-shouldered,
long-tailed coats and incredibly high
white collars were seen officially moving in the figures
of a cotillion. They usually arrived on the same
day, though often not by the same train; but this
was the mark of no disagreement or avoidance of
each other, yet bore some significance upon the difference
between them. It was the fashion to say of
them that never were two brothers so alike yet so
unlike; and although both were tall, with blue eyes,
brown hair, and features of pleasant contour decisively
outlined in what is called a family likeness,
people who knew them well found it a satisfying and
insoluble puzzle that they were the offspring of the
same father and mother.</p>

<p class="pindent">The contrast appeared in childhood and was manifest
to even the casual onlooker when Dan Oliphant
was eleven or twelve years old and Harlan ten or
eleven. At that age Harlan was already an aristocrat,
and, what is more remarkable, kept himself always
immaculate. If his collar rumpled or was
soiled he went immediately to his room and got a
fresh one; he washed his hands three or four times a
day without parental suggestion and he brushed his
hair almost every time he washed his hands. He was
fastidious in his choice of companions, had no taste
for chance acquaintances, and on a school holiday
could most frequently be found in the library at
home, reading a book beyond his years. The lively
Daniel, on the contrary, disported himself about the
neighbourhood—or about other neighbourhoods, for
that matter—in whatever society offered him any
prospect of gayety. He played marbles “for keeps”
with ragtag and bobtail on every vacant lot in town;
he never washed his hands or face, or brushed his hair,
except upon repeated command, yet loved water
well enough to “run off swimming” and dive through
a film of ice upon an early Saturday in March. He
regaled himself with horseplay up and down the
alleys and had long talks with negro coachmen in
their stables, acquiring strange wisdom of them; he
learned how to swear with some intricacy, how to
smoke almost anything not fireproof, how to “inhale,”
how to gamble with implements more sophisticated
than marbles, and how to keep all these
accomplishments from the knowledge of his parents.
He kept them from Harlan’s knowledge, also,
though not out of any fear that Harlan would “tell.”</p>

<p class="pindent">At some time in their early childhood the brothers
had made the discovery that they were uncongenial.
This is not to say that they were unamiable
together, but that they had assumed a relation not
wholly unknown among brothers. They spoke to
each other when it was necessary; but usually, if
they happened to find themselves together, they were
silent, each apparently unconscious of the other’s
presence. Sometimes, though rarely, they had a
short argument, seldom upon a subject of great importance;
and only once did a difference between
them attain the dimensions of a quarrel.</p>

<p class="pindent">This was on a summer day of feverish temperature,
and the heat may have had something to do with the
emotion displayed by young Daniel, then aged
twelve. He was engaged, that afternoon, with a
business friend, Master Sam Kohn, and they were
importantly busy in a latticed summer-house, an
ornament of the commodious lawn. They had entered
into a partnership for the sale of “Fancy
Brackets and Fittings,” which they manufactured
out of old cigar boxes, with the aid of glue, a jig-saw,
and blue paint. The computed profits were already
enormous, though no sales had been attempted,
since the glue was slow to harden on such a hot day;
and the partners worked diligently, glad to shed their
perspiration for the steadily increasing means to
obtain riches.</p>

<p class="pindent">At five o’clock Harlan dropped lightly from the
big stone-trimmed bay window of the library, crossed
the lawn, where the grass was being gilded now by
the westering sun, and halted before the entrance
of the summer-house. He was the picture of a cool
young gentleman, perfect in white linen; his coat and
trousers of this pleasant material were unflawed by
wrinkle or stain; his patent-leather pumps, unmarred
by the slightest crack, glittered among the short
green blades of grass; his small black satin tie was as
smooth as his brown hair.</p>

<p class="pindent">To this perfection the busy partners within the
summer-house were a sufficient contrast. Soiled blue
upon every available surface, they continued their
labours, paying no visible attention to the cold-eyed
young observer, but consulting each other perhaps
the more importantly because of the presence
of an audience, however skeptical. Master Kohn,
swarthy, bow-legged, and somewhat undersized for
his thirteen years, was in fact pleased to be associated
with the superior Harlan, even so tenuously. He
was pleased, also, to be a partner of Dan’s, though
this was no great distinction, because Dan, as the
boys’ world knew, would willingly be friendly (or
even intimate) with anybody, and consequently no
social advancement was to be obtained through him.
That commodity is to be had of only those who decline
to deal in it, and thus Sam Kohn felt that he
was becoming imbued with a certain amount of superiority
because Harlan Oliphant had come to look
on at the work.</p>

<p class="pindent">Sam decided to make a suggestion. “Look at
your brother,” he said to Dan. “Maybe he’d like
to git into our partnership. We could give him a
share, if he starts in fresh and works hard.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Thanks!” Harlan said with cold sarcasm, and
addressed his brother: “Do you know what time it
is and what the family is supposed to do this evening?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes,” Dan answered, not looking up from his jig-saw.
“We’re goin’ to dinner at grandma Savage’s.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Mother sent me to tell you it’s time for you to
come in and wash yourself and dress up,” said Harlan.
“The mess you’ve got yourself in, it’ll take
you till after six o’clock, and we’re supposed to be
there then.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Sam and I got some pretty important jobs to
finish,” Dan returned carelessly. “I got plenty
time to change my clo’es and get washed up.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, you haven’t. You quit playing with that
boy and those dirty things and go in the house.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Upon this, Dan stopped the operation of the jig-saw
and looked at his brother in a puzzled way. “What
you mean callin’ our brackets and fittin’s ‘dirty
things?’ ” he inquired. “I expect you don’t hardly
realize Sam Kohn and I got a regular factory here,
Harlan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“A ‘factory,’ is it?” said Harlan, and laughed in
the manner of a contemptuous adult. “Well, you
close up your old factory and come in the house and
get ready.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I can’t for a while,” Dan returned, beginning his
work with the jig-saw again. “I told you we got
lots to do before we quit to-night.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You stop playing with that silly little saw,” Harlan
said sharply, for he had begun to feel some
irritation. “You come in the house right this instant.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No; I can’t yet, Harlan. Sam and I got to——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Never mind!” Harlan interrupted. “You come
in the house and let this boy go home.”</p>

<p class="pindent">There was a frosty sharpness in his way of saying
“let this boy go home” that caused Dan to stop his
work again and stare at his brother challengingly.
“Here!” he exclaimed. “This is as much my father
and mother’s yard as it is yours, and you got no
business hintin’ at any friend of mine to go home.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Haven’t I?” Harlan inquired, adopting a light
mockery. “So this is a friend of yours, is it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, it is.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, a <span class="it">friend</span>?” Harlan mocked. “Oh, <span class="it">excuse</span>
me! I didn’t understand!”</p>

<p class="pindent">This proved to be intolerably provocative;—Dan
abandoned the jig-saw and stepped out of the summer-house
to confront his brother frowningly. “You
shut up, Harlan Oliphant,” he said. “This is Sam
Kohn’s and my factory, and he’s got a right here.
You quit your talkin’ so much around here.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You quit your own talking,” Harlan retorted.
“You do what mother sent me to tell you to, and let
that dirty little Jew go home!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What?” Dan cried.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You better!” Harlan said, standing his ground,
though Dan lifted his hand threateningly. “We
don’t want any dirty little Jews on our premises.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan gulped. “It isn’t his fault he’s a Jew. You
take that back!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I won’t,” said Harlan. “He <span class="it">is</span> little and he <span class="it">is</span>
dirty and he’s a Jew. How you going to deny it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">Flushed with anger and greatly perplexed, Dan
glanced over his shoulder at Master Kohn, who
looked on with an inscrutable expression. “Well,
what if I can’t?” Dan said desperately, after this
glance at his guest and partner. “You got no right
to insult him.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It isn’t an insult if it’s true, is it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, it is; and you ought to be ashamed of yourself.
I got a notion—I got a notion——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What notion have you got?” Harlan asked
scornfully, as his brother paused, swallowing heavily.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I got a notion to make you ashamed!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“How would you do it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“ ‘How?’ I’ll show you how!” And again Dan’s
clenched right hand lowered threateningly. The
brothers stood eye to eye, and both faces were red.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Go on,” said Harlan. “Hit me!”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan’s fist, like his expression, wavered for a moment,
then he said: “Well, I wish you weren’t my
brother; but you are, and I won’t hit you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I thought you wouldn’t,” Harlan retorted, turning
toward the house. “I guess I’ll have to tell
mother you won’t wash yourself and dress until
she comes and sends this dirty little Jew out of our
yard.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Thus, having discovered the tender spot in his opponent’s
sensibilities, he avenged himself for the
threat, and went on. His brother moved impulsively,
as if to follow and punish, but Mrs. Oliphant
had long ago impressed her sons heavily with the
story of Cain and Abel, and he halted, while Harlan
went on coolly and disappeared into the house by a
side entrance.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Doggone you!” Dan muttered; then turned back
to the factory, where Master Kohn, his head down
and his hands in his pockets, was scuffing sawdust
meditatively with the soles of his shoes. Dan likewise
scuffed sawdust for a time.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well,” Sam Kohn said finally, “I guess I better go
on home before your mamma comes to turn me out.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t guess she would,” Dan said, not looking
at him, but keeping his gaze upon his own scuffing
shoe. “She’s got a good deal o’ politeness about
her, and I don’t guess she would. You got a right
to stay here long as you want, Sammy. It’s half
your factory.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Not if your family puts me out, it ain’t.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“He had no business to call you that, Sammy.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“To call me which?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“A—a Jew,” said Dan, still keeping his eyes upon
the ground.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, I am a Jew.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, maybe; but——” Dan paused uncomfortably,
then continued: “Well, he didn’t have
any right to call you one.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, he had,” Sam returned, to his friend’s surprise.
“He could call me a Jew just the same I
could call you English.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“English? I’m not English.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, you’re <span class="it">from</span> English.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No,” Dan protested mildly. “Not for a couple
o’ hundred years, anyway.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, I ain’t from Jews a couple thousand years,
maybe.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But I’m full-blooded American,” said Dan.</p>

<p class="pindent">“So’m I,” Sam insisted. “You’re American from
English, and I’m American from Jews. He’s got a
right to call me a Jew.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan stared at him incredulously. “Don’t you
mind it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes,” Sam admitted, “I do when he says it for a
insult. He’s got a right to call me a Jew, but he
hasn’t got no right to call me a Jew for a insult.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, he did,” Dan remarked gloomily. “He
meant it the way you might call somebody ‘Irish’
or ‘Dutchy’ or ‘Nigger.’ ”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I know it. He called me dirty and little, too.
Well, I am little, but I ain’t no dirtier than what
you are, Dan, and you’re his own brother.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, then, you oughtn’t to mind his callin’ you
dirty, Sam.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“He wouldn’t call you dirty the same way he would
me,” Sam returned shrewdly; and then, after a momentary
pause, he sighed and turned to go.</p>

<p class="pindent">But that sigh of his, which had in it the quality of
patience, strongly affected Dan’s sympathies, for a
reason he could not have explained. “Don’t go,
Sammy,” he said. “You don’t have to go just because
he——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yeh, I better,” Sam said, not looking back, but
continuing to move toward the distant gate. “I
better go before your mamma comes to put me out.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan protested again, but Sam shook his head and
went on across the lawn, his hands in his pockets, his
head down. The high iron fence, painted white,
culminated in an elaborate gateway, and, when Sam
passed out to the sidewalk there, the iron gateposts
rose far above him. Plodding out between these
high white posts, the shabby little figure did not lack
pathos; nor was pathos absent from it as it went
doggedly down the street in the thinning gold of the
late afternoon sunshine. Sam looked back not once;
but Dan watched him until he was out of sight, then
returned to the interior of the summer-house, sat
down, and stared broodingly at the littered floor.
The floor was not what he saw, however, for his
actual eyes were without vision just then, and it was
his mind’s eye that was busy. It dwelt upon the
picture of the exiled Sam Kohn departing forlornly,
and the longer it thus dwelt the warmer and more
threatening grew a painful feeling that seemed to locate
itself in Dan’s upper chest, not far below his
collar bone.</p>

<p class="pindent">This feeling remained there while he dressed; and
it was still there when he sat down at his grandmother’s
table for dinner. In fact, it so increased in
poignancy that he could not eat with his customary
heartiness; and his lack of appetite, though he made
play with seemingly busy fork and spoon to cover it,
fell under the sharp eye of the lady at the head of the
table. She was a handsome, dominant old woman,
with high colour in her cheeks at seventy-eight, and
thick hair, darker than it was gray, under her lace cap.
She sat straight upright in her stiff chair, for she detested
easy-chairs and had never in all her life lounged
in one or sat with her knees crossed; such things were
done not by ladies, but by hoodlums, she said.
Her husband, a gentle, submissive old man, was frail
and bent with his years, though they had brought
him great worldly prosperity; and the grandchildren
of this couple never spoke of the house as “Grandpa
Savage’s,” but always as “Grandma Savage’s,” an
intuitive discrimination that revealed the rulership.
Mrs. Savage ruled by means of a talent she had for
destructive criticism, which several times prevented
her optimistic husband from venturing into ruin, and
had established her as the voice of wisdom.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Daniel,” she said presently;—“you’re not eating.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, I am, grandma.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No. Ever since you came to the table, you’ve
been sitting there with your head bent down like
that and moving your hands to pretend you’re eating,
but not eating. What’s the matter with you?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Nothin’,” he muttered, not lifting his head.
“I’m all right.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Adelaide,” Mrs. Savage said to his mother;—“has
his appetite been failing lately?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, no, mamma,” Mrs. Oliphant answered.
She was a pretty woman, quietly cheerful and little
given to alarms or anxieties. “Not seriously,” she
added, smiling. “He did very well at lunch, at
least.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“He looks sickish,” said Mrs. Savage grimly.
“He looks as if he were beginning a serious illness.
Well people don’t sit with their heads down like that.
What is the matter with you, Daniel?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Nothin’,” he said. “I told you I’m all right.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“He isn’t though,” Mrs. Savage insisted, addressing
the others. “Do you know what’s the matter
with him, Harlan?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Too much glue, I expect.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Too much glue,” Harlan repeated. “He was
playing with a lot of nasty glue and paint all afternoon,
and I expect the smell’s made him sick. Too
much glue and too much Jew.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Jew?” his grandmother inquired. “What do
you mean by ‘too much Jew,’ Harlan?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“He had a dirty little bow-legged Jew playing with
him.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“See here!” Dan said huskily, but he did not look
up. “You be careful!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Careful of what?” Harlan inquired scornfully.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Careful of what you say.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Daniel, were you playing with a Jew?” his grandmother
asked.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, I was.”</p>

<p class="pindent">He still did not look up, but his voice had a tone,
plaintive and badgered, that attracted the attention
of his grandfather, and the old gentleman interposed
soothingly: “Don’t let ’em fret you, Dannie. It
wasn’t particularly wicked of you to play with a
Jew, I expect.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No,” said Dan’s father. “I don’t believe I’d let
myself be much worried over that, if I were you, Dan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No?” said Mrs. Savage, and inquired further,
somewhat formidably: “You don’t prefer your sons
to choose companions from their own circle, Henry
Oliphant?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, yes, I do, ma’am,” he returned amiably.
“As a general thing I believe it’s better for them to
be intimate with the children of their mother’s and
father’s old family friends; but at the same time I
hope Dan and Harlan won’t forget that we live in a
country founded on democratic principles. The population
seems to me to begin to show signs of altering
with emigration from Europe; and it’s no harm for
the boys to know something of the new elements,
though for that matter we’ve always had Jews,
and they’re certainly not bad citizens. I don’t see
any great harm in Dan’s playing a little with a
Jewish boy, if he wants to.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I wasn’t playin’,” Dan said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Weren’t you?” his father asked. “What were
you doing?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“We were—we were manufacturing. We were
manufacturing useful articles.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What were they?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Ornamental brackets to nail on walls and put
things on. We were goin’ to make good money out
of it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, that was all right,” Mr. Oliphant said
genially. “Not a bad idea at all. You’re all right,
Dannie.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Unfortunately, a word of sympathy often undermines
the composure of the recipient; and upon this
Dan’s lower lip began to quiver, though he inclined
his head still farther to conceal the new tokens of his
agitation.</p>

<p class="pindent">He was not aided by his coolly observant young
brother. “Going to cry about it?” Harlan asked,
quietly amused.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You let Dannie alone,” said the grandfather;
whereupon Harlan laughed. “You ought to see
what he and his little Jew partner called brackets!”
he said. “Dan’s always thinking he’s making something,
and it’s always something just awful. What
he and that Sam Kohn were really making to-day
was a horrible mess of our summer-house. It’ll take
a week’s work for somebody to get it cleaned up, and
he got mad at me and was going to hit me because
mamma sent me to tell him to come in the house and
get ready for dinner.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I did not,” Dan muttered.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You didn’t? Didn’t you act like you were going
to hit me?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes,” Dan said. “But it wasn’t because
what you say. It was because you called Sam
names.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I didn’t.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You did!” And now Dan looked up, showing
eyes that glistened along the lower lids. “You—you
hurt his feelings.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Harlan had the air of a self-contained person who
begins to be exasperated by a persistent injustice,
and he appealed to the company. “I told him time
and again mamma wanted him to come in and get
ready to come here for dinner, and he simply wouldn’t
do it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Mrs. Savage shook her head. “I’ve always told
you,” she said to her daughter, “you’ll repent
bitterly some day for your lack of discipline with your
children. You’re not raising them the way I raised
mine, and some day——”</p>

<p class="pindent">But Harlan had not finished his explanation. “So,
after I waited and waited,” he continued, “and they
just went on messing up our summer-house, I told
him he’d better come in and let the dirty little Jew
boy go home. That’s all I said, and he was going to
hit me for it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You—you hurt his fuf-feelings,” Dan stammered,
as his emotion increased. “I told you, you hurt his
<span class="it">feelings</span>!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Pooh!” Harlan returned lightly. “What feelings
has he got? He wouldn’t be around where he
doesn’t belong if he had any.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I asked him there,” Dan said, the tears in his
eyes overflowing as he spoke; and he began to grope
hurriedly through his various pockets for a handkerchief.
“He had a right to be where he was invited,
didn’t he? You—you called him——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I said he was just exactly what he is, and if
he ever comes around our yard again, I’ll say it
again.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, you won’t!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, yes, I will,” Harlan said with perfect composure;
and this evidence that he believed himself
in the right and would certainly carry out his
promise was too much for the suffering Dan,
who startled his relatives by unexpectedly sobbing
aloud.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You dog-gone old <span class="it">thing</span>!” he cried, his shoulders
heaving and his voice choked with the half-swallowed
tears in his throat. “I <span class="it">will</span> hit you now!” He rose,
making blind sweeps with both arms in the direction
of Harlan, and, in a kind of anguish, gurgling out imprecations
and epithets that shocked his family; but
Mr. Oliphant caught the flailing hands, took the boy
by the shoulders and impelled him from the room,
going with him. A moment or two later the passionate
voice ceased to be coherent; plaintive sounds
were heard, growing fainter with increasing distance;
and Mr. Oliphant, slightly flushed, returned to finish
his dinner.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I sent him home,” he explained. “He’ll probably
feel better, out in the dark alone.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“And may I inquire, Henry Oliphant,” said the
old lady at the head of the table;—“is that all you
intend to do about it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, I might talk to him after he cools off a
little.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, I suppose that will be all!” Mrs. Savage returned
with a short laugh, emphatically one of disapproval.
“It’s a fine generation you modern people
are raising. When I was fifteen I was supposed to
be a woman, but my father whipped me for a slight
expression of irreverence on Sunday.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’m sorry to hear it, ma’am,” her son-in-law said
genially.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’m not sorry it happened,” she informed him,
not relaxing. “Such things were part of a discipline
that made a strong people.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, ma’am; I’ve no doubt it’s to your generation
we owe what the country is to-day.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“And it’s your generation that’s going to let it go
to the dogs!” the old lady retorted sharply. “May
I ask what you intend to do to protect Harlan when
you go home and his brother attacks him?”</p>

<p class="pindent">But at this Oliphant laughed. “Dan won’t attack
him. By the time we get home Dan will probably
be in bed.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Then he’ll attack Harlan to-morrow.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, he won’t, ma’am. I don’t say Dan won’t
sleep on a damp pillow to-night, the way he was
going on, but by to-morrow he’ll have forgotten all
about it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“He won’t,” she declared. “A child can’t have a
passion like that, with its parents doing nothing to
discipline it, and then just forget. Harlan only did
his duty, but Dan will attack him again the first
chance he gets. You’ll see!”</p>

<p class="pindent">Oliphant was content to let her have the last word—perhaps
because he knew she would have it in any
event—so he laughed again, placatively, and began
to talk with his father-in-law of Mr. Blaine’s chances
at the approaching national convention; while Mrs.
Savage shook her gloomy, handsome head and made
evident her strong opinion that the episode was anything
but closed. There would always henceforth
be hatred between the two brothers, she declared
to her daughter, whom she succeeded in somewhat
depressing.</p>

<p class="pindent">But as a prophet she appeared before long to have
failed, at least in regard to the predicted feeling between
her two grandsons. Dan may have slept on
his wrath, but he did not cherish it; and the next
day his relations with Harlan were as usual. The
unarmed neutrality, which was not precisely a mutual
ignoring, was resumed and continued. It continued,
indeed, throughout the youth of the brothers; and
prevailed with them during their attendance at the
university at New Haven, whither they went in
imitation of their father before them. The studious
Harlan matriculated in company with his older
brother; they were classmates, though not roommates;
and peace was still prevalent between them
when they graduated. Nevertheless, in considering
and comprehending the career of a man like Daniel
Oliphant, certain boyhood episodes appear to shed
a light, and the conflict over little Sammy Kohn
bears some significance.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER II</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="dropcap">I</span>T WAS not altogether without difficulty that
the older of the brothers graduated. Harlan
obtained a diploma inscribed with a special bit
of classic praise, for he was an “Honour Man”; but
Daniel trod the primrose way a little too gayly as a
junior and as a senior. Anxiety had sometimes been
felt at home, though knowledge of this was kept
from old Mrs. Savage; and Mr. and Mrs. Oliphant
were relieved of a strain when Dan was granted his
degree at a most reluctant eleventh hour, and telegraphed
them:</p>

<div class="blockquote100percent">

<p class="pindent"><span style="font-size:smaller">Last prof to hold out gave up after I talked to him all afternoon
and said I could have diploma, if I would quit arguing.</span></p>

</div>

<p class="pindent">Thus the two young bachelors of arts came forth
together into a pleasant world, of which they already
knew somewhat less than they supposed they did.</p>

<p class="pindent">The world for them, in that day, which the newspapers
were beginning to call <span class="it">fin de siècle</span>, included
rather sketchily London, Paris, Florence, and a part
of the Alps, for they had spent two vacations abroad
with their parents; but in the main the field of action
to which they emerged from the campus consisted of
their own city and New York. No sooner were they
out of the university than they began the series of
returns eastward that was part of the life of every
affluent young midland graduate. They went back
for the football games, for class dinners, for baseball
and boat races, and commencement. New York was
their playground as they went and came; and they
remained there to play for months at a time.</p>

<p class="pindent">It was a pleasanter playground in those days than
it is now, when even the honeycombed ground under
foot has its massacres, and the roaring surface congests
with multitude on multitude till fires must
burn and patients must die, since neither firemen nor
doctors may pass. For the growth came upon New
York as it came upon the midland cities, and it
produced a glutted monster, able to roar and heave
and mangle, but not to digest or even to swallow the
swarms that came begging to be devoured. In the
change there perished something romantic and charming,
something that a true poet used to call Bagdad.</p>

<p class="pindent">So far as it concerned Mr. Daniel Oliphant, aged
twenty-six, New York was romantic Bagdad enough
when the jingling harness began to glitter in the
park and on the Avenue in the afternoon, and he
would go out from the Holland House to see the
pretty women, all beautifully dressed, he thought,
and wearing clumps of violets, or orchids, as they
reclined in their victorias drawn by high-stepping
horses. Dan liked to watch, too, the handsome
grooms and coachmen in their liveries, with cockaded
silk hats, white breeches, top boots, and blue
coats; for they were the best-dressed men in the
town, he thought, and he often wished he knew
whether they were really as haughty as the horses
they drove or only affected to be so proud professionally.</p>

<p class="pindent">In New York, this Daniel took some thought to his
own tailoring and haberdashing; he would even add
a camellia to the lapel of his frock coat when he
strolled down to lounge in the doorway of the great
Fifth Avenue Hotel and stare at the procession of
lovely girls from everywhere in the country, their
faces rosy in the wind, as they walked up Broadway
after an autumn matinée. Then he would join the
procession, a friend accoutred like himself being
usually with him, and they would accompany the
procession sedately in its swing up the Avenue;
sometimes leaving it, however, at the magnificent
new Waldorf, where the men’s café offered them refreshment
among lively companions. In truth, this
congenial resort had too great an attraction for the
amiable Dan, and so did the room with the big mirror
behind the office at the Holland House. Moreover,
when he spoke of Daly’s, he did not always mean
Mr. Augustin Daly’s theatre, though he preferred it
to the other theatres; sometimes he meant a Daly’s
where adventure was to be obtained by any one who
cared to bet he could guess when a marble would stop
rolling upon a painted disk.</p>

<p class="pindent">Of course he made excursions into the Bowery,
waltzed and two-stepped at the Haymarket after
long dinners at clubs, fell asleep in hansom cabs at
sunrise, and conducted himself in general about as
did any other “rather wild young man,” native or
alien, in the metropolis. There were droves of such
young men, and, like most of the others, Dan frequently
became respectable, and went to a dinner or
a dance at the house of a classmate; he was even
seen at church in the pew of a Madison Avenue
family of known severity. However, no one was
puzzled by this act of devotion, for Lena McMillan,
the daughter of the severe house, was pretty enough
to be the explanation for anything.</p>

<p class="pindent">Her brother George, lacking the severity of other
McMillans, and as unobtrusive as possible in advertising
that lack, was one of Dan’s chance acquaintances
during a Bagdadian night. At the
conclusion of many festivities, the chance acquaintance
murmured his address, but Dan comprehended
the unwisdom of a sunrise return of so flaccid a
young gentleman into a house as formidable as the
McMillans’ appeared to be, when the night-hawk
hansom stopped before it; and the driver was instructed
to go on to the Holland House. Young
McMillan woke at noon in Dan’s room there; shuddered
to think that but for a Good Samaritan this
waking might have taken place at home, and proved
himself first grateful, then devoted. It was the beginning
of a lifelong friendship; and he took Dan to
tea in Madison Avenue that afternoon.</p>

<p class="pindent">Something withholding about the McMillans
reminded their guest of his brother Harlan; and
probably Dan would have defined this as “an air of
reserve”; but it was more than reserve, deeper than
reserve, as in time he discovered. George McMillan
alone seemed to have none of it; on the contrary,
his air was habitually friendly and apologetic—possibly
because of what he knew about himself and
what his family didn’t. Mrs. McMillan and her
daughters found it unnecessary either to smile or
offer their hands when George presented the good-looking
young Midlander, nor did they seem to believe
themselves committed to any effort to make
the stranger feel at home in their long, dark drawing-room.</p>

<p class="pindent">They gave him a cup of tea and a bit of toast, and
that appeared to be the end of their obligation to a
stray guest, for they at once continued a conversation
begun before his arrival, not addressing themselves
to him or even looking at him. Mrs. McMillan’s
cousin’s husband, named Oliver, he gathered,
was about to be offered a position in the cabinet
at Washington, and Mrs. McMillan hoped Oliver
wouldn’t accept, because Milly and Anna and Charlotte,
persons unknown to Dan, would have to give
up so much if they went to live in Washington instead
of Boston. If it were an ambassadorship the
President wanted Oliver for, that would be better,
especially on Charlotte’s account.</p>

<p class="pindent">The guest began to have an uncomfortable feeling
that he must be invisible;—no one seemed to know
that he was present, not even the grateful George,
who was feeble that afternoon and looked distrustfully
at his tea, of which he partook with an air of foreboding.
Dan could not help meditating upon what
a difference there would have been if the position
were reversed, with George as the guest and himself
as the host. Dan thought of it: how heartily his
mother and father would have shaken hands with
the young Easterner, welcoming him, doing every reassuring
thing they could to make him feel at home,
talking cordial generalities until they could get
better acquainted and find what interested him.
But although Dan felt awkward and even a little resentful,
it was not the first time he had been exposed
to this type of hospitality, and he was able to accept
it as the custom of the country. He made the best
of it and was philosophic, thinking that the McMillans
had given tea to a great many stray young men
of whom they knew nothing, and saw once but
usually never again. Also, it was a pleasure to look
at Lena McMillan, even though she was so genuinely
unaware of him.</p>

<p class="pindent">Outwardly, at least, she was unlike her mother
and older sister. Mrs. McMillan was a large woman,
shapely, but rather stony—or so she appeared to
Dan—and her hair rose above her broad pink forehead
as a small dome of trim gray curls, not to be
imagined as ever being disarranged or uncurled or
otherwise than as they were. She and her older
daughter, who resembled her, both wore black of
an austere fashionableness; but the younger Miss
McMillan had alleviated her own dark gown with
touches of blue—not an impertinent blue, but a
blue darkly effective; and, with what seemed almost
levity in this heavy old drawing-room, she wore
Italian earrings of gold and lapis lazuli. Her mother
did not approve of these; no one except opera singers
wore earrings, Mrs. McMillan had told her before
the arrival of the two young men.</p>

<p class="pindent">Lena was sometimes defined as a “<span class="it">petite brunette</span>,”
and sometimes as a “perfectly beautiful French
doll”; for she had to perfection a doll’s complexion
and eyelashes; but beyond this point the latter definition
was unfair, since dolls are usually thought
wanting in animation, a quality she indeed possessed.
Dan Oliphant, watching her, thought he
had never before met so sparkling a creature; and a
glamour stole over him. He began to think she was
the most beautiful girl he had ever seen.</p>

<p class="pindent">Possibly she became aware of the favour with which
he was regarding her, for although her shoulder and
profile were toward him, and for twenty minutes
and more she seemed to be as unconscious of his
presence as her mother and older sister really
were, she finally gave him a glance and spoke to
him. “George tells me you’re from the West,”
she said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“No. Not very,” he returned.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Not very west?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I mean not from the Far West,” Dan explained.
“Out there they’d call me an Easterner, of course.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Gracious!” she cried incredulously. “Would
they, really?”</p>

<p class="pindent">Already he thought her a wonderful being, but
at this he showed some spirit. “I’m afraid so,” he
said.</p>

<p class="pindent">She laughed, not offended, and exclaimed: “Oh,
so you don’t <span class="it">mind</span> being a Westerner! I only meant
you people are so funny about rubbing in the letter
<span class="it">R</span> and overdoing the short A that no one can ever
make a mistake about which of the provinces you
belong in. I’ve been in the West, myself—rather
west, that is. I didn’t care for it much.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Where was it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Rochester. I believe you’re from farther out,
aren’t you? Perhaps you can tell me if it’s true,
what we hear things are like beyond Rochester.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Things beyond Rochester?” he asked, mystified.
“What sort of things do you mean?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“All sorts,” she answered. “I’ve always heard
that when you get west of Rochester every house
has a room you people call a ‘sitting-room’, and you
always keep a sewing-machine in it and apples on a
centre table, and all the men keep tobacco in their
cheeks and say, ‘Wa’al, no, ma’am,’ and ‘Why,
certainly, ma’am,’ and ‘Yes, <span class="it">ma’am</span>!’ Isn’t that
what it’s like?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Who told you so?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, I had a cousin who used to visit people out
there. She said it was funny but dreadful. Isn’t
it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I wish you’d come and see,” he said earnestly.
“I wish you and your brother’d come and let me
show you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Good heavens,” she cried;—“but you’re hospitable!
Do you always ask everybody to visit you
after they’ve said two words to you?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, not everybody,” he returned, and on the impulse
continued: “I’d ask <span class="it">you</span>, though, after you’d
said <span class="it">one</span> word to me.” And because he meant it,
he instantly became red.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Good heavens!” she cried again, and stared at
him thoughtfully, perceiving without difficulty his
heightened colour. “Is that the way they talk in
the West, Mr.—uh——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oliphant,” he said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“What?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“My name’s Oliphant,” he informed her apologetically.
“You called me Mister Uh.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I see,” she said, and as her attention was caught
just then by something her sister was saying about
Milly and Anna and Charlotte and Oliver, she
turned from him to say something more, herself,
about Milly and Anna and Charlotte and Oliver.
Then, having turned away from him, she turned not
back again, but seemed to have forgotten him.</p>

<p class="pindent">The son of the house presently took him away, the
mother and her older daughter murmuring carelessly
as the two young men rose to go, while Lena
said more distinctly, “Good afternoon, Mister Uh.”
But the unfortunate Daniel carried with him a picture
that remained tauntingly before his mind’s eye;
and he decided to stay in New York a little longer,
though he had written his father that he would leave
for home the next day. He had been stricken at
first sight.</p>

<p class="pindent">He could not flatter himself that she had bestowed a
thought upon him. On the contrary, he told himself
that his impetuosity had made headway backwards;
and he was as greatly astonished as he was delighted
when George McMillan came to see him two afternoons
later, at the Holland House, and brought him
a card for a charity ball at the Metropolitan. “We
had some extra ones,” George said. “Lena thought
you might like to come.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“She did? Why, I—I——” Dan was breathless
at once.</p>

<p class="pindent">“What?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, I didn’t think she noticed I was on earth.
This is perfectly beautiful of her!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, no,” George assured him; “it’s nothing at
all. We had four or five cards we really didn’t know
what to do with. There’ll be an awful crowd there,
all kinds of people.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, I know; but it was just beautiful of her to
think of me.” And Dan added solemnly: “That
sister of yours reminds me of a flower.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“She does?” George said, visibly surprised. “You
mean Lena?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, I do. She’s like the most perfect flower that
ever blossomed.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“That’s strange news to me,” said George. “Then
maybe you’d be willing to come to the house to dinner
and go to this show with the family. Heaven knows
I’d like to have you; it might help me to sneak out
after we get ’em there. You sure you could stand
it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I should consider it the greatest privilege of my
life,” said Dan.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Heavens, but you’re solemn!” his caller exclaimed.
“You make me feel at home—I mean, as
if I were at home with my solemn family. Wait
till you meet some of the others—and my father.
He’s the solemnest. In fact, they’re all solemn except
Lena. There’s only one trouble with Lena.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What is it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“The poor thing hasn’t got any sense,” Lena’s
brother said lightly. “Never did. Never will have.
Otherwise she’s charming—when she’s in a mood to
be!”</p>

<p class="pindent">Evidently Lena was in a mood to be charming that
night; she sat next to Dan at the solemn dinner and
chattered to him gayly, though in a lowered voice,
for George had not exaggerated when he spoke of his
father. If she was a French doll, she was at least
a radiant one in her ball gown of heavy ivory silk,
and it was a thrilled young Midlander indeed who
took her lightly in his arms for a two-step when they
came out upon the dancing floor that had been laid
over the chairs at the opera house. “It was nice
of you to send me these flowers,” she said, as he dexterously
moved her through the crowd of other two-steppers.
“They’d tell anybody you’re Western, if
nothing else would. Western men always send orchids.
But then, of course, nobody’d need to be
told you’re from out there. You tell them yourself.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You mean I always mention it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No,” she laughed;—“your dialect does. The
way you pronounce <span class="it">R</span> and <span class="it">A</span>, and slide your words
together.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’ve got a brother that doesn’t,” said Dan. “He
talks the way you and your family do; he says
‘lahst’ and ‘fahst’ and calls father ‘fathuh’ and New
York ‘New Yawk,’ and keeps all his words separated.
He began it when he was about fifteen and
he’s stuck to it ever since. Says he doesn’t do it to
be English, but because it’s correct pronunciation.
I expect you’d like him.”</p>

<p class="pindent">At that she looked up at him suddenly, and he was
shown an inscrutable depth of dark blue glance that
shook his heart. “I like <span class="it">you</span>!” she said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Do you?” he gasped. “You didn’t seem to,
that day I met you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">She laughed. “I didn’t decide I liked you till after
you’d gone. You aren’t quite cut to the pattern of
most of the men I know. There’s something hearty
about your looks; and I like your broad shoulders
and your not seeming to have put a sleek surface
over you. At least it’s pleasant for a change.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Is that all?” he asked, a little disappointed.
“Just for a change?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Never mind. Is there anybody else in your
family besides your brother?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Heavens, yes! To begin with, I’ve got a grand
old grandmother; she’s over ninety, but she’s the
head of the family all right! Then there’s my father
and mother——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What are they like?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“My mother’s beautiful,” Dan said. “She’s just
the loveliest, kindest person in the world, and so’s
my father. He’s a lawyer.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What are you?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’m nothin’ at all yet. So far, I’ve just been
helpin’ my grandmother settle up my grandfather’s
estate. Somebody had to, and my brother’s in my
father’s office.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“And do your grandmother and your mother have
sitting-rooms with sewing-machines in them?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I wish you’d come and see.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Do you?” She had continued to look at him,
and now her eyes almost deliberately became dreamy.
“I might—if you keep on asking me,” she said
gravely. “I’m sure I’d hate the West, though.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yet, you might come?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Ask me again to-morrow.”</p>

<p class="pindent">He was but too glad to be obedient, and asked her
again the next day. This was over a table for two
at a restaurant on Lafayette Place, where she met
him as a surreptitious adventure, suggested by herself
and undertaken without notifying her mother.
It was a Lochinvar courtship, she said afterward,
thus implying that her share in it was passive,
though there were indeed days when the young man
out of the West found her not merely passive, but
dreamily indifferent. And once or twice she was
more than that, puzzling and grieving him by an inexplicable
coldness almost like anger, so that he consulted
George McMillan to find out what could be
the matter.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Moods,” George told him. “She’s nothing but
moods. Just has ’em; that’s all. It doesn’t matter
how you are to her; sometimes she’ll treat you like
an angel and sometimes like the dickens. It doesn’t
depend on anything you do.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan thought her all the more fascinating, and put
off his return home another month, to the increasing
mystification of his family, for this month included
the Christmas holidays, and Mrs. Oliphant wrote
that they all missed him, and that Mrs. Savage
really needed him. The McMillans, on the other
hand, were not mystified, and Lena appeared to be
able to control them. The manner of her parents
and her sister toward the suitor was one of endurance—an
endurance that intended to be as thoroughbred
as it could, but was nevertheless evident. It had
no discouraging effect on the ardent young man,
who took it as a privilege to be endured by beings so
close to her. Besides, George McMillan was helpful
with the exalted family, for he showed both tact
and sympathy, though the latter sometimes appeared
to consist of a compassionate amusement; and once
he went so far as to ask Dan, laughingly, if he were
quite sure he knew what he was doing.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Am I <span class="it">sure</span>?” Dan repeated incredulously. “I
don’t know what you mean.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I mean about Lena.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“To me,” Dan said, with the solemnity he had
come to use in speaking of her, “your sister Lena is
the finest flower of womanhood ever created!”</p>

<p class="pindent">Upon that, his friend stared at him and saw that
his eyes were bright with a welling moisture, so deep
was his worship; and George was himself affected.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, all right, if you feel that way about it,” he
said, “I guess it’ll be all right. I’m sure it will.
You’re a mighty right chap, I think.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I?” Dan exclaimed. “I’m nothin’ at all! And
when I think that your sister could stoop—could
<span class="it">stoop</span> to—to <span class="it">me</span>—why, I——”</p>

<p class="pindent">He was overcome and could not go on.</p>

<p class="pindent">The end of it was that when he went home in
February it was to acquaint his family with the fact
of his engagement; and in spite of his happiness he
was a little uneasy. He did not fear the interview
with his father and mother; and though he disliked
the prospect of talking about Lena with Harlan,
who was sure to be critical and superior, he had
learned to get along without Harlan’s approval.
What made him uneasy was his anticipation of the
invincible pessimism of that iron old lady, his grandmother.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER III</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="dropcap">T</span>HE Oliphants’ high white iron fence was a
hundred and fifty feet long on National
Avenue, a proud frontage, but the next yard
to the north had one even prouder: it was of a hundred
and eighty feet, and the big house that stood in
this yard was almost that far back from the street.
Built of brick and painted white, it reached a palatial
climax in a facing of smooth white stone under
a mansard roof, and the polished black walnut
front doors opened upon a stone veranda. From the
veranda a broad stone path led through the lawn
and passed a stone fountain on its way to the elaborate
cast-iron front gate, which was a congenial
neighbour to the Oliphants’ cast-iron gate to the
south. The stone fountain culminated in a bronze
swan, usually well supplied with ejectory water in
the summertime but somewhat bleak of aspect in
winter, when the swan’s open beak, perpetually vacant,
suggested to an observer the painful strain of
unending effort absolutely wasted. It was a relief,
after a snowstorm, to see the too-conscientious cavity
partially choked.</p>

<p class="pindent">A little snow remained there, like a cupful of salt
that the dutiful bird had firmly refused to swallow,
and snow glistened also along its dark green back,
one February afternoon, when a lady on her way from
the house to the gate paused by the fountain and
regarded the swan with apparent thoughtfulness.
She was twenty-three or perhaps twenty-four, tall
and robust, a large young woman, handsome, and
in a state of exuberant good health—her hearty complexion
and the brightness of her clear hazel eyes
were proof enough of that—and though a powdery
new snow, just fallen, lay upon the ground and the
air was frosty, she wore her fur coat thrown as far
open as possible. And that her thoughtfulness
about the bronze swan was only an appearance of
thoughtfulness, and not actual, was denoted by the
fact that her halt at the fountain coincided with a
sound from a short distance to the south of her. This
sound was the opening and closing of a heavy door;—it
was in fact the Oliphants’ front door, one of the
ponderous double doors of black walnut, like other
front doors of the stately row. The lady looked
at the swan only until the young man who had just
closed that door behind him emerged from the deep
vestibule and came down the steps.</p>

<p class="pindent">He was a stalwart, dark-haired, blue-eyed young
man, comely in feature and of an honest, friendly expression;
and although the robust young lady was as
familiar with his appearance as one could be who had
lived all her life next door, yet when her gaze swept
from the swan to him, she looked a little startled,
also a little amused. What thus surprised and
amused her was the unusual magnificence of his attire.
Upon occasion she had seen a high hat upon
him and likewise a full-skirted long coat and a puffed
scarf, but never spats until now; and never before
had she seen him carry a cane. This was of shining
ebony, with a gold top, and swung from a hand in a
dove-coloured glove. Dove was the exquisite tint,
too, of his spats.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Dan Oliphant!” she cried. “Why, my goodness!”</p>

<p class="pindent">At the sound of her voice his eye brightened;—he
turned at once, left the cement path that led to his
own gate and came across the frozen lawn to the
partition fence not far from her. Still exclaiming,
she went there to meet him.</p>

<p class="pindent">“My goodness gracious, Dan!” she cried, and
shook hands with him between two rods of the iron
fence.</p>

<p class="pindent">“What’s the matter, Martha?” he inquired.
“I’m mighty glad to see you. I just got home from
New York yesterday.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I know you did,” she said. “I mean I see you
did. I should <span class="it">say</span> so!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What’s all the excitement?”</p>

<p class="pindent">She proved unable to reply otherwise than by
continuing her exclamations. “Why, <span class="it">Dan</span>!” she
cried. “Dan <span class="it">Oliphant</span>!”</p>

<p class="pindent">At that he seemed to feel there would be no
readier way to solve the puzzle of her behaviour than
to adopt her style himself. “<span class="it">Martha!</span>” he exclaimed
then, in amiable mockery of her. “Martha <span class="it">Shelby</span>!
Well, good gracious <span class="it">me</span>!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It’s the royal robes,” she explained. “I’m overcome.
Your mother and father have been worrying
about your staying so long in New York, but certainly
they understand now what detained you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What do you think it was, Martha?” he asked,
his colour heightening a little.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, you were learning to wear spats, of course,
and how to carry a gold-headed cane. Is the President
passing through town this afternoon?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No. Why?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I thought you might be one of a committee to
meet him at the station and give him the keys of the
city,” said Miss Shelby. “Or are you going to
make a speech somewhere?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No. I’m going to call on my grandmother.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I hope dear old Mrs. Savage will be up to it.
Would you like to have me walk with you as far as
her gate? I’m going that way.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You bet I’d like it!” Dan said heartily, and without
exaggeration; for since this friendly next-door
neighbour and he were children there had never
been a time when he was not glad to see her or to be
with her, walking or otherwise. She had always
teased him mildly, now and then, but he bore it
equably, not by any means displeased. Nor was
he anything but pleased to-day, as they walked down
the broad and quiet avenue together, rather slowly,
and she resumed her mockery of his metropolitan
splendours.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I suppose your mother had to give up getting you
to wear an ulster this afternoon,” she said. “It
might have hidden that wonderful frock coat.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You know as well as I do I never wear an overcoat
unless it’s a lot colder than this,” he returned;
and he added: “You’re a funny girl, Martha
Shelby.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, don’t you consider you’re an old friend of
mine? Anyway, I do, and here I haven’t seen you
since way back last fall, and you haven’t said you’re
glad I’m back, or anything! The truth is, I was
kind of lookin’ forward to your sayin’ something
like that.”</p>

<p class="pindent">He spoke lightly, yet there was a hint of genuine
grievance in his voice, and she was obviously pleased
with it, for she gave him a quick side glance so fond
it seemed almost a confession. But she laughed,
perhaps to cover the confession, and said cheerfully:
“There’s one thing neither college nor New York
has changed about you, Dan. You’ll never learn
to sound the final <span class="it">G</span> in a participle; you’ll always say
‘lookin’ ’ and ‘sayin’ ’ and ‘goin’ ’ and ‘comin’.’
Doesn’t it worry Harlan?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Changin’ the subject, aren’t you?” he inquired.
“Why didn’t you tell me you’re glad I’m back home
again?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I am glad,” she said obediently. “Are you glad,
yourself?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“To see you? You know it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, I meant: Are you glad to be home?”</p>

<p class="pindent">He looked thoughtful. “Well, I like New York;
there isn’t any place else where you can see as much
or do as much when you want to; it’s always a mighty
fine show. And, besides, I like some people that live
there.” He hesitated, continuing: “I—well, I do
like some of the people in New York, but after all
I’m glad to get home; I’m mighty glad.” Then he
added, as a second thought: “In a way, that is.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“In what way particularly, Dan?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, I do like some New York people,” he insisted,
a little consciously;—“and I’m sorry to be
away from them, but it’s pretty nice to get back here
where you know ’most everybody you’re liable to
meet. When you see a dog, for instance, you know
who he belongs to and probably even his name—anyhow
you probably do, if he belongs in your own
part of town—and most likely the dog’ll know you,
too, and stop and take some interest in you. Of
course, I mean here you know everybody that <span class="it">is</span> anybody;—naturally
no one knows every soul in a town
this big—and growin’ bigger every day.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Hurrah for you!” she cried, laughing at him
again. “Why, you already talk like a member of
the Chamber of Commerce, Dan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“How’s that?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, you know the speeches they make: ‘A city
of prosperity, a city of homes, a city that produces
more wooden butter-dishes than all the rest of the
country combined! Yes, ladies and gentlemen, the
finest city with the biggest future in the whole extent
of these United States!’ ”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan laughed, but there came into his eyes a glint
of enthusiasm that was wholly serious. “Well, I
believe they’re not so far wrong, at that. In some
ways I think myself it is about the finest city in the
country. It kind of came over me when I got off
the train yesterday and drove up home through these
broad old streets with the big trees and big houses.
It’s when you’ve been away a good while that you
find out how you appreciate it when you get back.
Harlan’s just the other way; he says when he’s been
away and gets back, the place looks squalid to him.
‘Squalid’ was what he said. He makes me tired!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Does he?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes; when he talks like that, he does,” Dan answered.
“Why, the people you see on the streets
here, they’ve all got time enough and interest
enough in each other to stop and shake hands and
ask about each other’s families, and they’re mighty
nice, intelligent-looking people, too. In New York
everybody hurries by; they don’t know each other
anyway, of course; and if you get off Broadway and
Fifth Avenue and Madison Avenue, and one or two
other streets, you’re liable to see about as many
foreigners as you will Americans; but here they’re
pretty near all Americans. It’s kind of a satisfaction
to see the good, old-fashioned faces people have in
this city.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I like to hear you praising old-fashioned things,”
Martha Shelby said slyly. “You must have something
dreadfully important to say to your grandmother,
Dan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, don’t people put on their robes of state for
tremendous occasions? Or did you just get so in
the habit of it in New York that you can’t give it
up?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Maybe that’s it,” he laughed. “But I expect
it’ll wear off pretty soon if I stay here; and anyhow
I am glad to get back. The fact is I’m a lot gladder
than I expected to be. The minute I got off the train
I had a kind of feeling—a pretty strong feeling—that
this is where I honestly belong. It was home, and
the people and the streets and the yards and trees
and even the air—they all felt homelike to me. And
when I went into our good old house—why, I felt as
if I hadn’t been in a house, not a real <span class="it">house</span>, all the
time I was away. But most of all, it’s the people.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Your father and mother?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes,” he said;—“but I mean everybody else, too.
I mean you can seem to breathe easier with ’em and
let out your voice to a natural tone without gettin’
scared you’re goin’ to break a vase or something.
For instance, I mean the way I feel with you, Martha.
You see, with some New York people—I don’t mean
anything against ’em of course; but sometimes, when
a person’s with ’em, he almost feels as if he ought
to be artificial or unnatural or something; but nobody
could ever feel anything like that with you,
Martha.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No?” she said, and looked at him with a gravity
in which there was a slight apprehension. “Perhaps
you might like a little artificiality, though, just for a
change. A moment ago you said you thought your
New York habits would wear off, and you’d get more
natural, if you stay here. What did you mean?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Me not natural?” he asked, surprised. “Why,
don’t I seem natural?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, of course. You wouldn’t know how not to
be. You meant about your clothes. You said
you’d probably get over wearing so much finery as
a daily habit, if you stay here. Aren’t you going to
stay here, Dan?”</p>

<p class="pindent">Her sidelong glance at him took note of a change
in his expression, a perplexity that was faintly
troubled, whereupon the hint of apprehension in
her own look deepened. “Don’t tell me you’re
not!” she exclaimed suddenly, and as he failed to respond
at once, she repeated this with emphasis so increased
that it seemed a little outcry: “Don’t tell
me you’re <span class="it">not</span>!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I certainly hope to stay here,” he said seriously.
“I didn’t realize how much I hoped to until I got
back. I certainly would hate to leave this good old
place where I grew up.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But why should you leave it? Your mother told
me the other day you expected to go into business
here as soon as you get your grandfather’s estate
settled.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, I know,” he returned, and she observed that
his seriousness and his perplexity both increased.
“It’s always been my idea to do that,” he went on,
“and I still hope to carry it out. At any rate I’m
goin’ to try to.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Then why don’t you? What on earth could
prevent you?”</p>

<p class="pindent">Upon this, he seemed to take a sudden resolution.
“Martha,” he said, “I’ve got a notion to tell you
about something;—it’s something beautiful that’s
happened to me. I haven’t told anybody yet. I
wanted to tell my father and mother last night; but
Harlan kept sittin’ around where they were, until
they went to bed; and somehow I didn’t like to talk
about it before him—anyway not at first. And to-day
I haven’t had a chance to tell ’em; father’s
been down at his office and mother had two charity
board meetings. So you’ll be the first person to
know it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Will I?” Martha said in a low voice.</p>

<p class="pindent">But he did not notice its altered quality; he was
too much preoccupied with what he was saying; and
he still looked forward into the perplexing distance.
His companion’s gaze, on the contrary, was turned
steadily upon him; and the sunniness that had been
in her eyes had vanished, the colour of her cheeks
was not so brave in the cold air. “I’m a little afraid
to hear it, Dan,” she said. “I’m afraid you’re going
to say you got engaged to someone in New York.
You are?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes,” he answered gravely. “That’s what I’m
just on the way to tell my grandmother.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I guessed it,” Martha said quietly; and was silent
for a moment;—then she laughed. “I might have
guessed it from your clothes, Dan. You got all
dressed up like this just to talk about her! And to
your grandmother!”</p>

<p class="pindent">A little hurt by her laughter, he turned his head to
look at her and saw that there were sudden bright
lines along her eyelids. “Why, Martha!” he cried.
“Why, what——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Isn’t it natural?” she asked, smiling at him to
contradict the testimony offered by her tears.
“I’ve always had you for a next-door neighbour;
you’ve always been my best friend among the boys
I grew up with;—I’m afraid I’ll lose you if you get
married. Everybody likes you, Dan; I think everybody’ll
feel the same way. We’ll all be afraid
we’ll lose you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, Martha!” he exclaimed again, but he had
difficulty in misrepresenting a catch in his throat as a
cough. “I didn’t—I didn’t expect you’d think of
it like this. I do hope it doesn’t mean that I’ll have
to live in New York. I still hope to get her to
come here. I—I’d certainly hate to lose you more
than you would to lose me. I’ve always thought
of you as my best friend, too, and I couldn’t imagine
anything making that different. I’d hoped—I do
hope——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What, Dan?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I hope you—I hope you’ll like her, if we come
home to live. I hope you’ll be <span class="it">her</span> friend, too.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Indeed I will!” she promised so earnestly that
her utterance was but a husky whisper. “I’m glad
I’m the first you told, Dan. Thank you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, no,” he said awkwardly. “It just happened
that way.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, at least I’m glad it did,” she returned, and
brushing her eyes lightly with the back of a shapely
hand, showed him a cheerful countenance. “See!
you had just time to tell me.”</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER IV</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="dropcap">S</span>HE nodded to where before them a long
wooden picket fence outlined the street
boundary of Mrs. Savage’s lawn. Here was
an older quarter than that upper reach of National
Avenue whence the two young people had come;
the houses here and southward were most of them
substantial and ample, but not of the imposing spaciousness
prevailing farther up the avenue. Three or
four of them had felt the seventies so deeply as to
adopt the mansard roof in company with one or two
parasite slate turrets; but in the main the houses
were without pretentiousness; and among them it
was curious and pleasant to see lingering two or
three white, low-gabled cottages of a single story.</p>

<p class="pindent">In the summertime old-fashioned flowers grew in
the yards of these, and there might be morning-glories
climbing over the front doors; for the cottages
were relics of the time when the city was a village
and this region was the outlying fringe, beyond the
end of the wooden sidewalks. Now, however, it was
almost upon the edge of commerce;—there was smoke
in the air, and through the haze were seen rising, a
few blocks to the south, the blue silhouettes of dozens
of office buildings, the court-house tower, and the
giant oblong of the first skyscraper, the First National
Bank, eleven stories high. Moreover, one of
the white cottages had for next-door neighbour the
first apartment house to be built in the city;—it was
just finished, rose seven stories above its little neighbour,
and was significantly narrow. The ground
here had already become costly.</p>

<p class="pindent">Mrs. Savage’s gray picket fence joined the white
picket fence of the overshadowed white cottage and
her house was a good sample of four-square severity,
built of brick and painted gray, with two noble old
walnut trees in front, one on each side of the brick
walk that led from the gate to the small veranda.
Here she had lived during little less than half a century;—that
is to say, ever since her house had been
called “the finest residence in the city,” when her
husband built it in the decade before the Civil War.
Here, too, she “preferred to die,” as she said brusquely
when her daughter wished her to come and live
at the Oliphants’, after Mr. Savage’s death. She
was still “fully able to keep house” for herself, she
added, and expected to do so until Smith and Lieven
came for her; Smith and Lieven being the undertakers
who had conducted all the funerals in her
family.</p>

<p class="pindent">But at ninety-two it is impossible to withhold all
concessions; even a lady whose pioneer father whipped
her when she was fifteen must bend a little; and although
Mrs. Savage still declined to sit in a comfortable
chair, she took a daily nap in the afternoon.
She had just risen and descended to her parlour, and
settled herself by the large front window, when the
two young people, coming along the sidewalk, reached
the north end of her picket fence.</p>

<p class="pindent">She did not recognize them at first; for, although
her eyes “held out,” as she said, they held out not
quite well enough for her to see faces except as ivory
or pinkish blurs, unless they were close to her. However,
the two figures interested her; and because of
their slow approach and something intimate in the
way they seemed to be communing, she guessed that
they might be lovers. To her surprise, they halted
at her gate, but, instead of coming in, continued their
conversation there for several moments. Then,
though they appeared loath to separate, each took
both of the other’s hands for a moment, in an impulsive
gesture distinctly expressive of emotion, and
the woman’s figure went down the street, walking
hurriedly, while the man’s came in at the gate and
approached the front door. Mrs. Savage recognized
her grandson, but no slightest change in her
expression or attitude marked the moment of recognition.</p>

<p class="pindent">Upon the sound of the bell, the old coloured man
who had been her servant for thirty years came softly
through the hall, but instead of opening the door to
the visitor he presented himself before his mistress
in the parlour. He was a thin old man of the darkest
brown, neat and erect, with a patient expression,
a beautifully considerate manner, and a tremulous
tenor voice. In addition, his given name was both
romantic and religious: Nimbus.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You like to receive callers, Miz Savage?” he inquired.
“Doorbell ring.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I heard it,” the old lady informed him somewhat
crisply. “Have you any reason to suppose I can’t
hear my own doorbell?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No’m.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Then why did you see fit to mention that it
rang?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’ know, ’m. You hear good as what I do,
Miz Savage,” he returned apologetically. “I dess
happen say she ring. Mean nothin’ ’t all. You
like me bring ’em in or say ain’t home, please?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It’s my grandson, Dan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes’m,” said Nimbus, turning to the door; “I
go git him.”</p>

<p class="pindent">He went out into the broad hall and opened the
door to the thoughtful young man waiting there,
who shook hands with him and greeted him warmly;
whereupon Nimbus glowed visibly, expressing great
pleasure and cordiality. “My goo’nuss me!” he
said. “Hope I be close on hand when you git ready
shed them clo’es, Mist’ Dan. You’ grammaw cert’n’y
be overjoice’ to see you ag’in. She settin’ in polluh
waitin’ fer you, if you kinely leave me rest you’ silk
hat an’ gole-head cane. <span class="it">My</span>, look at all the gole
on nat cane!”</p>

<p class="pindent">Receiving this emblem of state with murmurous
reverence, he solicitously bore it to the marble-topped
table as the young man entered the room where his
grandmother awaited him. She sat by the broad
window, which had been the first plate-glass window
in the town, and in her cap with lace lappets and her
full, dark gown, she was not unsuggestive, in spite
of her great age, of Whistler’s portrait of his mother.
Certainly, until her grandson took her hand and sat
down beside her, she was as motionless as a portrait.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Grandma,” he said remorsefully, “I’m afraid
you feel mighty hurt with me. I know it looked
pretty selfish of me not to come home sooner, so we
could go ahead and get grandpa’s estate settled up.
I expect you think I haven’t been very thoughtful of
you, and you certainly have got a right to feel kind
of cross with me, but the truth is——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No,” she interrupted quietly. “Your father
was too busy to attend to the estate himself, and I
didn’t want Harlan because I know he’d spend all
his time criticizing; and besides he didn’t offer to do
it in the first place, and you did. But your father
hired a lawyer for me, and the work’s about finished.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I know what you think of me——” he began
but again she interrupted.</p>

<p class="pindent">“No; you behaved naturally in staying away.
Young people always say they like to help old people,
but it isn’t natural. Mankind are all really just
Indians, naturally. In some of the lower Indian
tribes they kill off everybody that gets old and useless,
and that’s really the instinct of the young in
what we call civilization. We old people understand
how you young people really think of us.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, my!” the young man groaned. “I was
afraid you were a little hurt with me, but I didn’t
dream you’d feel <span class="it">this</span> way about it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No,” she said;—“you were having too good a
time to dream how anybody’d feel about anything.
Your father and mother worried some about you, and
once or twice your father talked of going East to see
what you were up to. They were afraid you were
running wild, but I told ’em they needn’t fret about
that.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Did you, grandma?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes. Your running wild would never amount
to much; you come of too steady a stock on both sides
not to get over it and settle down. No; what I was
afraid of is just what I expect has happened.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What’s that?” Dan asked indulgently. “What
do you think’s happened, grandma? Think I got
too extravagant and threw away a lot of money?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No,” she replied; and to his uncomfortable amazement
continued grimly: “I expect you’ve fallen in
love with some no-account New York girl and want
to marry her.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Grandma!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I do!” the old lady asserted. “Isn’t that what’s
been the matter with you?”</p>

<p class="pindent">She spoke challengingly, with an angry note in
the challenge, and Dan’s colour, ruddy after his walk,
grew ruddier;—the phrase “no-account New York
girl” hurt and offended him, even though his grandmother
knew nothing whatever of Lena McMillan.
“You’re very much mistaken,” he said gravely.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I hope so,” Mrs. Savage returned. “Who was
that you were talking to out at my front gate?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Martha Shelby.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Martha? That’s all right,” she said, and added
abruptly: “If you’ve got to marry somebody you
ought to marry her.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“If you’ve got to marry somebody,” this uncomfortable
old lady repeated, “why don’t you marry
Martha?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, that’s just preposterous!” Dan protested.
“The last person in the world Martha’d ever think
of marrying would be me, and the last person I’d
ever think of marrying would be Martha.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why?” he repeated incredulously. “Why, because
we aren’t in love with each other and never
<span class="it">could</span> be! Never in the world!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It isn’t necessary,” Mrs. Savage informed him.
“You’d get along better if you weren’t. Martha
comes of good stock, and she’s like her stock.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“There are other ‘good stocks’ in the country,”
he thought proper to remind her gently. “There are
a few people in New York of fairly good ‘stock’, you
know, grandma.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Maybe a few,” she said;—“but not our kind.
The surest way to make misery is to mix stocks.
You come of the best stock in the country, and you’ll
be mighty sick some day if you go mixing it with a
bad one.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But good gracious!” he cried, “who’s talking of
my mixing it with a——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Never mind,” she interrupted crossly. “I know
what those New York girls are like.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But, grandma——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I do,” she insisted. “They don’t know anything
in the world except French and soirées, and it’s
no wonder when you look at their stocks!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Grandma——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Listen to me,” she bade him sharply. “The best
stocks in England were the yeoman stocks; you
ought to know that much, yourself, after all these
years you’ve spent at school and college. The
strongest in mind and body out of the English yeoman
stocks came to America; they fought the Indians
and the French and the British and got themselves
a country of their own. Then, after that, the strongest
in mind and body out of those stocks came out
here and opened this new country and built it up.
All they’ve got left in the East now are the remnants
that didn’t have gumption and get-up enough to
strike out for the new land. The only thing that
keeps the East going is the people that emigrate
back there from here in the second and third generations.
Don’t you mix your stock with any remnants!
D’you hear me?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, ma’am,” he meekly replied, dismayed not
only by the extremity of the discouraging old lady’s
view upon “stocks” and “New York girls,” but also
by her shrewdness in divining the cause of his long
absence. Nevertheless, he ventured to protest
again, though feebly. “I think if you could see
New York nowadays, grandma, you wouldn’t think
it’s a city built by ‘remnants,’ exactly.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t have to see it,” she retorted. “I know
history; and besides, I was there with your grandfather
in eighteen fifty-nine. We stayed two weeks
at the Astor House, and your grandfather was mighty
glad to get back here to home cooking. Even then
all the smart men in New York came from somewhere
else. Outside of them and the politicians, the
only New York people you ever hear anything about
are the ones that have had just barely gumption
enough to be stingy.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What? Why, grandma——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“They never made anything; they’ve just barely
got the gumption to hold on to what’s been left to
’em,” she insisted. “As soon as anybody gets
money, everybody else sets in to try to get it away
from him. They try to get him to give it away; they
try to trade him out of it, or to swindle him out of it,
or to steal it from him. Everybody wants money
and the only way to get it is to get it from somebody
else; but for all that, the lowest form of owning
money is just inheriting it and sitting down on it;
and that’s just about all they know how to do, these
New York folks you seem to think so much of!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But my goodness, grandma!” the troubled young
man exclaimed. “I haven’t said——”</p>

<p class="pindent">She cut him off again, for she was far from the conclusion
of her discourse; and he got the impression—a
correct one—that during his protracted absence
she had been bottling within herself the considerable
effervescence she now released upon him. She interrupted
him with great spirit. “You wait till I’m
through, and then you can have your say! I know
these New York girls better than you do. You
aren’t capable of knowing anything about women
anyway, at your age. You’re the kind of young
man that idealizes anything that’ll give you half a
chance to idealize it. You are! I’ve watched you.
What do girls mean to a young man like you? If
he doesn’t think they’re good-looking, they don’t
mean anything at all to him; it’s just the same as if
they weren’t living. But if he thinks some silly
little thing is pretty, and she takes special notice of
him, that’s enough;—he’s liable to start right in and
act like a crazy man over her! She may be the
biggest fool, and the meanest one, too, on earth; he
thinks she’s got all the goodness and all the wisdom in
the universe! You can’t help getting into that state
about her; but after you’ve been married awhile the
gloss’ll wear off and you’ll begin to notice what
you’ve tied yourself up to—to live with till you’re
dead!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But I haven’t told you——”</p>

<p class="pindent">Again she disregarded him. “<span class="it">I</span> know these New
York highty-tighties!” she said. “Your grandfather
and I went to Saratoga the year after the war, and
we spent a month there. We saw a plenty of ’em!
They aren’t fit to do anything but flirt and talk
French and go to soirées. They’re the most ignorant
people I ever met in my life. They’re so ignorant
if you asked their opinion of Lalla Rookh they
wouldn’t know what you were talking about; but they
think you’re funny if you don’t know that some fancy
milliner of theirs keeps store on Broadway and not on
the Bowery. That’s about the measure of ’em.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, not nowadays, exactly,” her grandson said
indulgently. “Some of the ones you saw at Saratoga
thirty or forty years ago may have been like that,
grandma, but nowadays——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Nowadays,” she said, taking the word up
sharply, “they’re just the same. They fooled the
young men then just the same as they fool ’em now.
They make a young man like you think they know
everything, because they’re pretty and talk that affected
way Harlan does.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But with them it isn’t affected, grandma. It’s
natural with them. They’ve <span class="it">always</span>——”</p>

<p class="pindent">But the obdurate old lady contradicted him instantly.
“It’s not! It isn’t natural for any human
being to talk like that! You mustn’t bring one of
those girls out here to live, Dan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Grandma”—he began in an uneasy voice;
“Grandma, I came here to tell you——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, I was afraid of it,” she said. “I was afraid
of it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Afraid of what?”</p>

<p class="pindent">A plaintive frown appeared upon her forehead
before she answered. She sighed deeply, as if the
increased rapidity of her breathing had made her
insecure of continuing to breathe at all; and her frail
hands, folded in her lap, moved nervously. “Don’t
do it, Dan,” she said. “You ought to wait a few
years before you marry, anyway. You’re so young,
and one of those New York girls wouldn’t understand
things here; she wouldn’t know enough not
to feel superior. You’d just make misery for yourself.”</p>

<p class="pindent">But at this he laughed confidently. “You don’t
know the one I’m thinkin’ of,” he said. “You’ve
guessed something of what I came to tell you,
grandma, but you’ve certainly missed fire about her!
I’ll show you.” And from his breast pocket he took
an exquisite flat case of blue leather and silver;
opened it, and handed it to her. “There’s her photograph.
I’d like to see if you think <span class="it">she’s</span> the kind
you’ve been talkin’ about!”</p>

<p class="pindent">Mrs. Savage put on the eye-glasses she wore fastened
to a thin chain round her neck, and examined
the photograph of Lena McMillan. She looked at
it steadily for a long minute, then handed it back to
her grandson, removed her glasses, and, without a
word, again folding her hands in her lap, looked out
of the window.</p>

<p class="pindent">Under these discomfiting circumstances Dan said,
as hopefully as he could, “You’ve changed your
mind now, haven’t you, grandma?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“On account of that picture?” she asked, without
altering her attitude.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes. Don’t you think she’s—don’t you think
she’s——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Don’t I think she’s what?” Mrs. Savage inquired
in a dead voice.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Don’t you think she’s perfect?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Perfect?” Expressionlessly, she turned and
looked at him. “What are your plans, Dan?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You mean, when do we expect to——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No. What business are you going into?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well——” He paused doubtfully; “I still hope—I
mean, if I don’t have to go to New York to
live——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“So?” she interrupted with seeming placidity.
“She declines to come here to live, does she? She
hates it here, does she, already?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t think she would,” he said quickly. “Not
if she once got used to it. You see she doesn’t know
anything about it; she’s never been west of Rochester,
and she only <span class="it">thinks</span> she wouldn’t like it. I’ve
been doin’ my best to persuade her.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But you couldn’t?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, I haven’t given up,” he said. “I think
when the time comes——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But if she won’t, ‘when the time comes’,” Mrs.
Savage suggested;—“then instead of living here,
where you’ve grown up and want to live, you’ll go
and spend your life in New York. Is that it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, I——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“So you’d do it,” she said, “just to please the face
in that photograph!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You don’t understand, grandma,” he returned,
and he hurriedly passed a handkerchief across his
distressed forehead. “You see, it isn’t only Lena
herself don’t think much of our part of the country.
You see, her family——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Ah!” the grim lady interrupted. “She’s got a
family, has she? Indeed?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Great goodness!” he groaned, “I mean her
father and mother and her sister and her aunts
and her married sister, and everybody. They’re important
people, you see.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Are they? What do they do that’s important?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It isn’t so much what they do exactly,” he explained,
“it’s what they <span class="it">are</span>. You see, they’re descended
from General McMillan and——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“General McMillan? Never heard of him. What
was he a general of? New York militia? Knights
of Pythias, maybe?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’m not exactly certain,” Dan admitted, again
applying his handkerchief to his forehead. “I think
he had something to do with history before the
Revolution. I don’t know just what, but anyhow
they all feel it was pretty important; and you see
to them, why I’m just nobody at all, and of course
they must feel I’m pretty crude. It’s true, too, because
I <span class="it">am</span> crude compared to Lena; and for a good
while her family were more or less against any such
engagement. Of course, the way they think about
<span class="it">my</span> family is even worse than the way you think about
<span class="it">them</span>, grandma; and naturally she says herself they’re
positive it’d be a terrible sacrifice for her to come
and live out here. I mean that’s the way they look
at it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Of course they do,” said Mrs. Savage. “That’s
the way those New York people at Saratoga thought
about this part of the country. They’re just the
same nowadays, I told you; they haven’t got the
kind of brains that can learn anything. Does this
photograph girl herself talk about what a ‘sacrifice’
it would be for her to live here?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Lena McMillan is a noble girl,” Dan informed her
earnestly. “She feels a lot of respect for her family’s
wishes, and besides she doesn’t like the idea of leavin’
New York herself; but I don’t remember her usin’
the word ‘sacrifice’ exactly. She doesn’t put it that
way.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What about <span class="it">you</span>? Do you put it that way?
Do you think it would be a sacrifice for her to come
and live here?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I?” Dan was obviously astonished to be asked
such a question. “Why, my goodness!” he exclaimed,
“I wouldn’t be beggin’ her to try it if I
thought so, would I? If I can just get her to try it
I know she’ll like it. How could anybody help
likin’ it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You’re pretty liable to find out how this photograph
girl will help it!” his grandmother prophesied,
and promptly checked him as he began to protest
against her repeated definition of Lena as “this
photograph girl.” She retorted, “Tut, tut!” as a
snub to his protest, then inquired: “What business
do you expect to go into, if you live in New York?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t know,” he said gloomily. “I don’t see
what I could do there.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What will you do if you stay here?”</p>

<p class="pindent">At that he brightened instantly. “Why, I think
I’ve got hold of a big idea, grandma. I began to
think about it last September, and it’s been in my
mind all the time I was away;—I’ve been goin’ over
it and workin’ it out. It’s something would make a
mighty good profit for me and at the same time I
think it’d be a big thing for this city.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Indeed?” she said. “Yes, you’re at the age
when everything looks like a ‘big thing.’ Your
grandfather used to talk like that when we were first
married.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, he was one of this city’s most successful
men, wasn’t he? He did do big things, didn’t he?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“That was in the early days when he kept us poor,”
she said, with a short laugh of extreme dryness.
“He had ideas about going into things to make this
a greater city, and get ‘a mighty good profit’ for
himself, the way you talk now—but what finally
made his money was keeping <span class="it">out</span> of big schemes. It
was what I kept him from doing that made us well off,
not what he did. We saved and went into safe
things like the First National Bank stock. When
it comes to you and Harlan, after I’m gone, you
mustn’t ever sell that bank stock, Dan. What is
this ‘big idea’ you spoke of?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It’s the old Ornaby farm, grandma.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, I see,” she assented with ready satire.
“Yes; this photograph girl will make a fine farmer’s
wife!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, she won’t,” he returned good-naturedly.
“That farm lies right where this city’s bound to grow
to. I want to take the money grandpa left me and
buy it. Then I’ll lay it out in lots and make an
Addition of it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“So?” she said. “That’s the ‘big idea,’ is it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“That’s it, grandma.”</p>

<p class="pindent">She shook her head in pitying skepticism. “You
can’t carry it out. In the first place, the town’ll
never grow that far out——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, it will,” he interrupted eagerly. “Why, in
three years at the longest——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No,” she said; “it won’t. Not in three years and
not in thirty. Anyhow, your grandfather only left
you twenty-five thousand dollars. You’d better keep
it and not throw it away, Dan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I can get the Ornaby farm for seventeen thousand,”
he informed her. “That’ll leave eight thousand
to clear off the lots and put asphalt streets
through and——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Put asphalt streets through!” she echoed.
“How many miles of asphalt streets do you expect
to build with eight thousand dollars after you’ve
cleared the lots and advertised enough to boom an
Addition?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’ve been hopin’ I’d get help on that,” he said,
his colour heightening a little. “I thought maybe
I could get Harlan to come in with the twenty-five
thousand grandpa left him. If he does——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“He won’t. Harlan isn’t the kind to risk anything.
He won’t.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, then,” Dan said, “I’ll go ahead and get
other people. I’m goin’ to do it, grandma, if I have
to take an ax and a shovel and a wheelbarrow out
there and do it all by myself. I’ve been thinkin’ it
over a long time, and I know it’s a big thing.” He
laughed a little at his own enthusiasm, but again
declared, with earnest determination: “Yes, ma’am!
I’m goin’ to build ‘Ornaby Addition.’ ”</p>

<p class="pindent">But his grandmother’s compassionate skepticism
was not lessened. On the contrary, she asked him
quietly: “You’re going to build ‘Ornaby Addition’
at the same time you expect to be living in New York
with this photograph girl for a wife? How do you
think you’ll manage it, Dan?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, she’ll come here,” he said. “I know she will,
when I make her see what a big chance this idea of
mine gives us. I think I can get her to try it, anyhow;
and if she’ll just do that it’ll come out all right.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You think she’ll be a great help to you, do you,
while you’re working with a wheelbarrow out on
Ornaby’s farm?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Do I?” he exclaimed, and added radiantly:
“ ‘A help?’ Why, grandma, she—she’ll be a great
deal more than a help; she’ll be an inspiration!
That’s exactly what she’ll be, grandma.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Old Mrs. Savage looked at him fixedly, sighed, and
spoke as in a reverie. “Ah, me! How many, many
young men I’ve seen believing such things in my
long time here! How many, many I’ve seen that
were going to do big things, and how many that
thought some no-account girl was going to be their
inspiration!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Grandma!” he cried indignantly, and rose from
his chair. “You haven’t any right to speak of her
like that.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No right?” she said quietly. “No, I s’pose not.
I wonder how many hundred times in my life I’ve
been told I hadn’t any right to speak the truth. It
must be so.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But it <span class="it">isn’t</span> the truth,” Dan protested, and in a
plaintive agitation he moved toward the door. “I
showed you a photograph of the sweetest, noblest,
most beautiful woman that’s ever come into my life,
and you speak of her as—as—well, as you just did
speak of her, grandma! I wouldn’t hurt your feelings
for the world, but I—well, you aren’t fair. I don’t
want to say any more than that, so I expect I better
go.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Wait!” she said sharply; and he halted in the
doorway. “You wait a minute, young man. I’m
going to say my last say to you, and you better
listen!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, of course I will, if you want me to,
grandma,” he assented, as he came back into the
room and stood before her. “Only I hope you won’t
say anything against her; and I don’t think you
ought to call it your ‘last say’ to me. I’m sure you
won’t stop speakin’ to me.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Won’t I?” she asked; and he was aware of a
strange pathos in her glance, and that her head constantly
shook a little. “Won’t I? I’m going to
stop speaking to everybody, Dan, before long.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But you look so well, grandma; you oughtn’t
to talk like that.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Never mind. My talking is about over, but I’m
going to tell you something you may remember
when I can’t talk any more at all. Your father and
mother won’t even try to have any influence with
you; they haven’t raised their children the way I did
mine. Your father and mother have always been
too easy-going with you to really help you by disciplining
you when you wanted to do anything wrong,
and they’ll both act the gentle fool with you now, just
as they always have about everything. They won’t
stop you from going ahead with this photograph girl.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No,” Dan said gently;—“and nothing could stop
me, grandma. I told you she’s the finest, most
beautiful——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Be quiet!” the old lady cried. “How much of
that same sort of twaddle do you suppose a body’s
heard in a life of ninety-two years? How many
times do you suppose I’ve had to listen to just such
stuff? Good heavens!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But, grandma——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You listen to <span class="it">me</span>!” she said with sudden ferocity.
“You don’t know anything about the girl, and you
don’t know anything about yourself. At your age
you don’t know anything about anything. You
don’t even know you don’t know. And another
thing you don’t know is, how much you’ve told me
about this girl and her family without knowing it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Grandma, I told you they’re fine people
and——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Fine people!” she said bitterly. “Oh, yes! And
how have they treated you?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, aren’t they givin’ me their—their dearest
treasure? Doesn’t that show how they——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, doesn’t it?” she interrupted. “It shows
how much of a treasure <span class="it">they</span> think she is!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Grandma——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You listen! You’re a splendid young man, Dan
Oliphant. You’re good-looking; you’re honourable
as the daylight; you’re kindhearted, and you’d be
just as polite to a nigger or a dog as you would to the
President; and anybody can tell all that about you
by just looking at you once. But this good-for-nothing
girl and her good-for-nothing family have
made you feel you weren’t anybody at all, and ought
to feel flattered to scrub their doormat! Don’t tell
me! They have! And because you let yourself get
as soft as a ninny over a silly little pretty face, you
truckle to ’em.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Grandma!” He laughed despairingly. “I haven’t
been truckling to anybody.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You have, and she’ll keep you at it all your life!”
the old lady said angrily. “<span class="it">I</span> know what that face
means. I’ve seen a thousand just like it! She’ll
use you and make you truckle to <span class="it">be</span> used! And if
you give in to her and live in her town, she’ll despise
you. If you make her come and live in your town,
she’ll hate you. But she’ll always keep you truckling.
Your only chance is to get rid of her.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Grandma,” he said desperately;—“I’m sorry,
but I can’t hear you talk this way about the sweetest,
the most perfect, the loveliest——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Get rid of her!” she cried. And as the distressed
young man went out into the hall she leaned forward
in her chair, shaking at him a piteously bent and
emaciated forefinger. “You get rid of her, if you
don’t want to die in the gutter! Get rid of her!”</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER V</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="dropcap">D</span>AN walked home from his grandmother’s
with the wind blowing a fine snow against
his chest, within which something seemed
to be displaced and painful. Higher up, under the
cold sleek band of his tall hat, there was a stricken
puzzlement; and no doubt he was in hard case. For
a young lover rebuffed upon speaking of his sweetheart
is like a fine artist who has made some fragile,
exquisite thing and offers it confidently in tender
pride, only to see it buffeted and misprized. To Dan
it seemed as though Lena herself had been injuriously
mishandled, whereas the injury fell really upon something
much more delicate; the lovely image he had
made for himself and thought was Lena—an angelic
substance most different from the substance of that
“little brunette” herself.</p>

<p class="pindent">He told himself that his grandmother had increased
in unreasonableness with increasing age, but in spite
of all efforts to reassure himself, and notwithstanding
her prediction that he would receive a foolish support
from his parents in the matter of his engagement,
it was decidedly without jauntiness that he
made his announcement to them after dinner that
evening.</p>

<p class="pindent">He found them in the library, a shadowy big room
where the fire of soft coal twinkled again upon polished
dark woodwork, upon the clear glass doors of
the bookcases, and touched with rose the eye-glasses
and the shining oval façade of Harlan’s shirt as he
sat reading Suetonius under a tall lamp in the bay
window. Harlan, unlike his father and his brother,
always “dressed” for dinner.</p>

<p class="pindent">He was the thinner and perhaps an inch the shorter
of the two brothers; but in spite of their actual likeness
of contour, people who knew them most intimately
sometimes maintained that there was not even
an outward resemblance, so sharp was the contrast in
manner and expression. It was Martha Shelby who
said that if Harlan had been a year shipwrecked and
naked on a savage isle he would still look fastidious
and wear “that same old ‘How-vulgar-everything-seems-to-be!’
expression.” Tramps approaching
Harlan on the street to beg a dime from him usually
decided at the last moment to pass on in philosophic
silence.</p>

<p class="pindent">He was no more like the two handsome, gray-haired
people who sat by the library fire, that evening,
than he was like his brother. Mr. Oliphant,
genial and absent-minded, was the very man of
whom any beggar would make sure at first sight; and
he was without an important accumulation of fortune
now, in fact, because venturous friends of his
had too often made sure of him to go on a note or to
forestall a bankruptcy that eventually failed to be
forestalled. His wife was not the guardian to save
him from a disastrous generosity; she was the most
ready woman in the world to be recklessly kind, and
when kindness brought losses she kept as sunny a
heart as her husband did.</p>

<p class="pindent">Mrs. Savage was right: from this pair no discipline
for the good of their son’s future need have been
expected, although her own effect upon him had been
so severe that he began his announcement in the
library with a defensive formality that denoted apprehension.
His formality, moreover, was elaborate
enough to be considered intricate, with the result that
his surprised listeners were at first not quite certain
of his meaning.</p>

<p class="pindent">His father withdrew slippered feet from close intimacy
with the brass fender enclosing the hearth,
stared whimsically at his son, and inquired: “What
is it all about, Dan?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Sir?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It doesn’t quite penetrate,” Mr. Oliphant informed
him. “You seem to be making an address,
but I’m not secure as to its drift. I gather that you
believe something about there coming a time in a
young man’s life when his happiness depends upon
an important step, and you’d hate to be deprived of
something or other. You said something, too, about
a union. It didn’t seem to connect with labour
questions, so I’m puzzled. Could you clarify my
mind?”</p>

<p class="pindent">Harlan, resting his book in his lap, laughed dryly
and proffered a suggestion: “It sounds to me, sir, as
if he might possibly mean a union with a damsel of
marriageable age and propensities.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Dan!” the mother cried. “Is that what you
mean?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes’m,” he said meekly. “I wanted to tell you
last night, but—well, anyway it’s so. She’s the
most splendid, noblest, finest girl I ever met, and I
know you’ll think so, too. Here—well, here’s her
picture.” And he handed the blue case to Mrs.
Oliphant.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, Dan!” she said, suddenly tearful, as she
took the case and held it open before her.</p>

<p class="pindent">Her husband, not speaking, got up quickly, came
behind her and looked over her shoulder at the photograph
of Lena. Then after a moment he looked at
Dan, but for a time seemed to be uncertain about
what he ought to say. “She’s—ah—she’s pretty
enough, Dan,” he said finally, in his kind voice.
“She’s certainly pretty enough for us to understand
your getting this way about her.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, Dan,” his mother agreed. “She—she’s
quite pretty. I’m sure she’s pretty.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“She’s beautiful!” Dan declared huskily. “She’s
beautiful, and she’s more than that; she has a character
that’s perfect. She has an absolutely perfect
character, mother.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I hope so,” Mrs. Oliphant said gently, bending
her head above the blue case. “After all, you can’t
tell everything from a photograph.” She looked up
at her husband as if arguing with him. “You <span class="it">can’t</span>
tell much from a photograph.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No,” he assented readily. “Of course you can’t.
In fact, you can tell very little; but you can see this
is a pretty girl, anyhow. I expect you’d better tell
us a little more about her, Dan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan complied. That is to say, he did his best
to make them comprehend Lena’s perfection; and,
touching lightly upon her descent from that somewhat
shadowy figure in heroic antiquity, General
McMillan—Dan felt sensitive for the general since
Mrs. Savage’s suggestion about the Knights of
Pythias—he kept as much as possible to the subject
of Lena herself, and ended by declaring rather oratorically
that she had just the qualities he had always
admired in the noblest women.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I do hope so, Dan dear,” his mother said, her
eyes still shining with tears in the firelight. “I do
hope so!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes,” Mr. Oliphant agreed, “I hope so, too, Dan;
and anyhow, if you’ve cared enough about her to
ask her to marry you, that’s the main thing. You
can be sure your mother and father will do their best
to be fond of anybody you’re fond of.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But she <span class="it">has</span> those qualities, father,” Dan said,
not quite sure, himself, why he seemed to be insisting
upon this in a tone so plaintively argumentative.
“Indeed she has! She has just exactly the qualities
I’ve always admired in the noblest women I’ve ever
known.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“In grandma, for instance?” Harlan inquired.</p>

<p class="pindent">“What?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You said she had just the qualities you’ve observed
in the noblest women. Well, grandma has
noble qualities. I was wondering——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No,” Dan said, swallowing. “Lena—well, she’s
different.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“If she has the qualities that will help you in
building your future,” Mrs. Oliphant said, “that
will be enough for us.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“She has, mother. Those are just exactly the
qualities she’s got. Don’t you think when—when——”
He faltered, obviously in timidity, and
glanced nervously at the observant Harlan.</p>

<p class="pindent">“When what, dear?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, when—when a wife’s an—an inspiration,”
he said, gulping the word out;—“well, isn’t that just
everything?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Of course, dear,” Mrs. Oliphant said comfortingly.
Then, when she had touched her eyes with
her lace-edged little handkerchief, she spoke more
briskly. “This will be quite exciting news for your
grandmother, Dan. Poor dear woman! She’s been
waiting so anxiously for you to come home; and she’s
grown so frail these last few months; she kept saying
she was afraid she wouldn’t last till you got here.
She’s devoted to Harlan, of course, but I think you’ve
always been a little her favourite, Dan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“A little?” Harlan repeated serenely. “She really
doesn’t like me at all.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, yes, she does,” his mother protested. “She’s
devoted to you, too, but she——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No,” Harlan interrupted quietly; “she’s never
liked me. I have no doubt when her will is read
you’ll find it out.”</p>

<p class="pindent">But upon this his father intervened cheerfully.
“Let’s don’t talk about her will just yet,” he said.
“She’s going to be with us a long time, we hope.
Dan, you’d better go and tell her your news to-morrow.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I did, sir. I went this afternoon.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What did she say?”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan passed his hand across his forehead. “Well—she—well,
I told her about it and—well, you know
how she <span class="it">is</span>, sir. She—isn’t apt to get enthusiastic
about hardly anything. She seemed to think—well,
one thing she seemed to think was that I’m sort
of young to be gettin’ married.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, maybe,” said his father. “Maybe she’s
right.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, sir, I don’t believe so. You see grandma is
almost ninety-three. Why, to a person of that age
almost anybody else looks pretty young. You see,
it isn’t so much I <span class="it">am</span> young; it’s only I look young to
grandma.”</p>

<p class="pindent">But upon this argument, delivered in a tone most
hopeful of convincing, Mr. Oliphant laughed outright.
“So that’s the way of it!” he exclaimed, and,
returning to his seat by the fire, again extended his
feet to the fender. “Well, whether you’re really a
little too young or only appear so, on account of your
grandmother’s advanced age, we have to face the
fact that you’ve asked this young lady to marry you,
and she’s said she will. When that’s happened, all
the old folks can do is to make the best of it. You
know we’ll do that, don’t you, son?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, sir,” Dan said a little bleakly. “I knew
you would.” He took the blue case from his mother’s
lap, and kissed her as she looked pathetically
up at him; then he moved toward the door. “I—I
always knew I could count on you and mother,
sir.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, Dan,” Mrs. Oliphant murmured, “you know
you can.”</p>

<p class="pindent">And her husband, from his chair by the fireside,
echoed this with a heartiness that was somewhat
husky: “Yes, indeed, Dan. If the young lady is
necessary to your happiness——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, sir.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, we’ll just try to say, ‘God bless you both,’
my boy.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, sir,” Dan returned, with an inadequacy
that he seemed to feel, himself, for he lingered near
the doorway some moments more, coughed in a futile
and unnecessary manner, then said feebly: “Well—well,
thank you,” and retired slowly to his own room.</p>

<p class="pindent">When his steps were no longer heard ascending the
broad stairway, the sound of a quick sob, too impulsive
to be smothered, was heard in the silent library,
and Mr. Oliphant turned to stare at his wife.
“Well, what’s the matter?” he said. “I told you,
you can’t tell anything from a photograph, didn’t
I?”</p>

<p class="pindent">She pressed her handkerchief to her eyes and shook
her head, offering no other response.</p>

<p class="pindent">Thereupon he struck the poker into the fire, badgered
a lump of coal, and said gruffly: “It’s all nonsense!
She may turn out to be the finest girl in the
world. How can you tell anything from a photograph?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You can’t much,” the serene Harlan agreed. He
spoke from his easy-chair in the bay window, whither
he had returned from an unemotional excursion to
the blue leather case when it was exhibited. “You
can see, though, that Dan’s young person is perfect,
as he said, in several ways.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Think so?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes; she’s perfectly <span class="it">à la mode</span>; she’s perfectly
pretty—and perfectly what we usually call shallow.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, I don’t know.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Don’t you?” Harlan asked, with a slight amusement,
and added reflectively: “Martha Shelby won’t
like this much, I dare say.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No,” Mrs. Oliphant said faintly. “Poor
Martha!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, look here!” her husband remonstrated.
“What’s the use of all this? You’re acting as if
we were facing a calamity. Dan’s got a mighty
good head on his shoulders; he wouldn’t fall in love
with a mere little goose. Besides, didn’t I ask you:
‘What can you tell from a photograph?’ ”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Not everything, sir,” Harlan interposed. “But
you can usually get an idea of the type of person
it’s a photograph of.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, you can,” Mrs. Oliphant said. “That’s
what frightens me. She doesn’t seem the type that
would want to take care of him when he’s sick and be
interested in his business and help him. She might
even be the type that wouldn’t like living here,
after New York, and would get to complaining and
want to take him away. Of course it <span class="it">is</span> true we
can’t tell from that photograph, though.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Can’t you?” Harlan asked with a short laugh.
“Then why are you so disturbed by it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“That’s sense,” his father said approvingly. “If
you can’t tell anything about her, what’s the sense
of worrying?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It doesn’t appear that you got my point, sir,”
Harlan remarked. “You and mother are both disturbed
because you <span class="it">have</span> drawn certain conclusions.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“From that picture?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I think so, sir.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You’re talking nonsense,” Mr. Oliphant returned
testily. “Nobody can tell anything at all from a
photograph. Not a thing!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No,” Mrs. Oliphant agreed, wiping her eyes again.
“I hope not. I mean I’m <span class="it">sure</span> not.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“That’s right,” said her husband heartily. “That’s
the way to look at it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes; isn’t it!” said the sardonic Harlan, as he
resumed his reading; and for a time the library was
given over to a reflective silence;—the ceiling, fifteen
feet from the floor, was too solid a structure for the
pacing that had begun overhead to be heard below.</p>

<p class="pindent">Up and down his room Dan walked and walked.
In the few contemporary novels that he had read
the hero’s acceptance by a beautiful girl implied
general happiness on earth; all the difficulties of
mankind seemed to disappear with the happy elimination
of those of this favourite twain. Moreover,
when friends of his had become engaged there was
always joviality; there were congratulations and
eager gayeties; there were friendly chaffings from the
old stock of jokes on the shelves that afford generation
after generation supplies of such humour.
Sometimes, as he was growing up, he had thought
vaguely of the time when he would be telling people
of his own engagement; he had made in his mind momentary
sketches of himself, proud, happy, laughing,
and a little embarrassed, in a circle of his relatives
and friends who would be clamorous with loud felicitations
and jocose inquiries. This very vision
had come to him on his journey home so vividly that
he had chuckled aloud suddenly, in his berth at
night, surprising and somewhat abashing himself
with the sound.</p>

<p class="pindent">The picture had not been a successful prophecy
he perceived as he walked up and down in his dressing-gown
and slippers. Something appeared to have
gone wrong somewhere in a mysterious way; and he
could not understand what it was, could only pace
and grieve, and puzzle himself. Even his talk with
Martha Shelby had lacked the stimulating gayety
he expected, though she had been “mighty sweet
and sympathetic,” as he thought; and as for the interview
with his grandmother, he must simply try
to forget that! So he told himself, and shivered
abruptly, recalling the awfulness of her parting instructions.
His mother and father had been kind—“just
lovely”—but with them, too, something important
had been lacking; he could not think why;
and so walked and walked without much satisfaction
or relief.</p>

<p class="pindent">An hour after he had left the library there was
a knock on his door; and he opened this tall and
heavily panelled walnut barrier to admit his father,
who looked a little worried.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Dan,” he said, coming in;—“I’m afraid I’ve got
to get you to do something that won’t be much fun
for you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, sir.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Your aunt Olive’s just telephoned me she’s in a
little trouble to-night.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, sir,” Dan repeated. His aunt Olive, his
father’s widowed sister-in-law, was often in a little
trouble of one kind or another, and the Oliphant
family had learned to expect a call for help when she
telephoned to them. “Yes, sir. Does she want me?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Guess she does,” his father said. “Both the
children took sick at the same time yesterday morning,
she says. Mabel seems to be getting along
all right, but Charlie’s in a high fever. You see
there’s an epidemic of la grippe all over town—that’s
what’s the matter with ’em, the doctor thinks; but so
many people have got it she can’t find a nurse to
save her life. Says she’s hunted high and low and
there simply isn’t one to be had, and it seems Charlie’s
delirious; and he’s strong, for fourteen; it’s hard
to keep him in bed. I offered to go myself, but she
said she’d heard you were back in town, so she wondered
if you wouldn’t come over and sit up with him
just a night or so until she——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You tell her I’ll be right there.” Dan had
thrown off his dressing-gown and was in a chair,
drawing on a shoe. “Tell her——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I told her so. You needn’t break your neck
getting over there, Dan. I don’t think there’s any
particular hurry. She just said——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I know, sir. She gets scared about Charlie
mighty easy; but still I might as well move along, I
guess,” Dan said, and continued the hurried resumption
of his clothes.</p>

<p class="pindent">His father stood watching him, and seemed to be a
little troubled, showing a tendency toward apologetic
embarrassment. “Oh—ah, Dan——” he said, and
paused.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, sir?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I—ah—we—don’t want you to think——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Think what, sir?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, about your young lady—you took us by
surprise, Dan. We weren’t looking for what you
told us, and so it took your mother and me a little
bit off our feet, as it were, Dan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I—I suppose so,” Dan said. “I expect I didn’t
go about it with any intelligence in particular,
likely. I expect I ought to have——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, no. <span class="it">You</span> were all right, Dan. Only as we
weren’t just looking for it, we’ve been afraid we
didn’t seem as hearty about it as we should have.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, that’s all right.” Dan was embarrassed in
his turn. “You were—you were both just lovely
about it, sir. I didn’t expect—I mean, it isn’t the
kind of thing there’s any call for you and mother to
make a big jollification and fuss over. I wasn’t expectin’
anything like that.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No,” his father said thoughtfully, “I suppose not.
Only we’ve been afraid you might have been a little
disappointed in the quiet way we took it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, no, sir!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, I hope not. And anyway, Dan, we <span class="it">are</span>
glad about it, if you’re sure you are.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, sir. Thank you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“And we want you to know we’re <span class="it">with</span> you, Dan.
We’re with you and for you, and we stand by
you,” Mr. Oliphant continued; then paused, and
concluded with a haste not altogether fortunate—“whatever
happens.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, sir,” Dan said, seeming to flinch a little,
though meekly; and his father at once added an
amendment to the awkward phrase.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Of course, we think only the pleasantest things
will happen, Dan. And we want you to understand
that this house must be home for anybody that belongs
to you as much as it is for the rest of us. You
know we feel that way, don’t you, son?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, sir. I do hope to bring her here, if you’ll let
me. I’ve been thinkin’ about it a great deal, and
I believe this town is my town”—Dan flushed a little
as he spoke—“and I want to prove it, and I want
Lena to learn to feel about it the way I do. I believe
she’d miss something out of her life if she didn’t.
And I want you all to learn what a noble girl she is.
I know you will, father.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, of course!” Mr. Oliphant took his son’s
hand and shook it. “We didn’t happen to say it
downstairs, but we do congratulate you, Dan. As
far as anybody can tell from a photograph”—he
paused again here, then finished with a great
heartiness of voice—“why, as far as you can tell
from that, why, she looks like—she looks like a
mighty pretty girl.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, sir.” Dan smiled with a little constraint.
“There’s something else I want to talk over with you
when we get time enough. I’ve got hold of a big
idea, father.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Have you, my boy?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It’s about our future,” Dan said nervously. “I
mean Lena’s and mine.” He hesitated, then went on:
“I expect it sounds like big talk from a little man,
but I believe it’s goin’ to be a great thing for the future
of our city, too.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Upon this his father’s expression of friendly concern
became complicated by evidences of a slight
inward struggle, but he was able to respond with
sufficient gravity: “Do you, Dan? What is
it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It’s an idea for a big development, sir. I mean
a development in the way this city’s commenced to
grow.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Indeed?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I guess I better tell you another time, sir; it’s
got lots of details, and I’m afraid I ought to be gettin’
on over to Aunt Olive’s now, sir.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I suppose so,” Mr. Oliphant said, relinquishing
his son’s hand. “I only wanted to say—about your
engagement—it’s all right with us, old fellow, and
we just hope <span class="it">we’ll</span> be all right with <span class="it">her</span>.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan was touched. His father spoke with feeling,
and the young man could not trust his eyes to be
seen. He hurried out into the spacious upper hall,
not looking back, though he said: “Yes, sir; thank
you,” in a choked voice. Then, when he was halfway
down the stairs, he called cheerfully: “I’ll let
you know to-morrow morning if there’s anything
much the matter with young Charlie. I’ll be home
for breakfast, anyway, and I’ll tell you about my
idea then, too. It’s goin’ to be a mighty big thing,
father!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I hope so, my boy,” Mr. Oliphant returned; and
although there was moisture in his own eyes, he had
difficulty in restraining, until the front door closed,
a tendency to laughter.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER VI</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="dropcap">T</span>HAT green bronze swan of the fountain in
the broad yard next door to the Oliphants’
should have been given a new interpretation
this season; the open beak, forever addressing itself
obliquely to the eastern sky, might well have been
thought to complain to heaven of the spiteful hanging
on of winter. It was a winter that long outwore
its welcome, and then kept returning like a quarrelsome
guest forcing his way back to renew argument
after repeated ejectments;—the Shelbys’ swan was
fortunate to be of bronze, for a wet snow filled that
exasperated-looking beak of his choke-full one morning
a month after the lilacs had shown green buds
along their stems. Then, adding mockery to assault,
this grotesque weather spent hour after hour patiently
constructing a long goatee of ice upon the
helpless bird.</p>

<p class="pindent">Martha Shelby knocked it off late in the afternoon,
though by that time the western sun had begun to
make all icicles into opals, radiant with frozen fire
and beautiful. “Insulting thing!” Martha said, as
she brought the ferrule of her umbrella resentfully
against the icicle, which broke into pieces that clattered
lightly down to the stone basin below. “Of
all the Smart Alecks I ever knew I think the worst
one’s the weather!”</p>

<p class="pindent">Her companion, a thin young man with an astrakhan
collar to his skirted long overcoat, assented
negligently. He had happened to overtake her as
she walked up National Avenue from downtown, and
was evidently disposed to extend the casual encounter
at least as far as her door, for he went on with her
in that direction as he spoke.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, I dare say. Nature, in general, has a way of
taking liberties with us that we wouldn’t tolerate
from our most intimate friends. I suspect if we
got at the truth of things we’d find that most of our
legislation is really an attempt to prevent Nature
from getting the better of us.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Murder!” said Martha. “That’s too deep for
me, Harlan! Let’s go on talking about poor old
Dan and things I can understand. Come into the
house and I’ll give you some tea; you’re the only
man-citizen I know in town who likes tea. I ought
to warn you that papa thinks there’s something queer
about you since that day after the matinée when you
came in and had tea with me. He thought it was
bad enough, your being at the matinée—papa says
if an old man is seen at a matinée it looks as if he’s
gone bankrupt and doesn’t care, but if it’s a young
man he must be out of a job and too lazy to look
for a new one—and for any man not only to go to
a matinée, but to drink tea afterwards, well, papa was
terribly mystified about anybody named Oliphant
doing such a thing! He can’t imagine a man’s consenting
to drink tea except to help fight off a chill.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, I know!” Harlan said. “I realize it’s a
terrible thing for one to do, only three generations
away from the pioneers.”</p>

<p class="pindent">As Martha chattered she had opened one of the
double front doors, which were unlocked, and now
she preceded him into the large central hall, floored
with black and white squares of marble. A fine
staircase, noble in proportions and inevitably of
black walnut, followed a curving upward sweep
against curved walls to the third story; while upon
both sides of the hall, broad and lofty doorways,
with massive double doors standing open, invited
the caller to apartments heavily formal in brown
velvet and damasks of gold.</p>

<p class="pindent">In obedience to a casual wave of Martha’s hand,
as she disappeared through a doorway at the other end
of the hall, Harlan left his overcoat and hat upon a
baroque gold console-table and entered the drawing-room
to his left. Here a fire of soft coal sought to
enliven a ponderous black-marble mantelpiece, and
Harlan, warming his hands, gazed disapprovingly at
the painting hung upon the heavy paper of the wall
above. This painting was not without celebrity,
but after looking at it seriously for several minutes
Harlan shook his head at it, and was caught in the
act by Martha, who came in with a light step behind
him.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Don’t scold the poor thing, Harlan!” she said;
and, as he turned, a little startled, he took note again
of a fact he had many times remarked before: she
moved with a noiseless rapidity unusual in so large a
person. Moreover, her quickness was twice in evidence
now; for she had changed her dark cloth dress
for a gown of gray silk; and as final testimony to her
celerity, when she sat in a chair by the fire and crossed
her knees, a silken instep of gray was revealed between
the silver buckle of her slipper and the hem
of the long skirt she wore in the mode of that time.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You’re like lightning, Martha,” Harlan said;—“but
not like thunder. I didn’t even hear you come
into the room. What is it you don’t want me to
scold?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Poor papa’s Corot.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I wasn’t scolding it. I was only thinking:
What’s the use of having a Corot if you hang it so
high and so much against the dazzle of the firelight
that nobody can see it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, that doesn’t matter to papa,” Martha said
cheerfully. “Papa doesn’t care to see it; and he
doesn’t care whether any one else sees it or not. He
bought it the summer the doctor made him go abroad,
after mamma died. Somebody in Paris convinced
him he ought to own an important picture. They
took him first to see a Bougereau and he got very
indignant. So they apologized and hurried out this
Corot and told him who Corot was; so he bought it.
All he cares about is that he owns it; he doesn’t think
about it as a thing to <span class="it">look</span> at any more than the bonds
in his safety-deposit boxes. He knows they’re
there, and they’re worth just so much, and they’re
his; and that’s all he cares about. You know papa
runs the house to suit himself.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No,” Harlan returned skeptically. “I can’t say
I quite know that.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You don’t?” She laughed and went on: “Well,
he does; especially when he gets set in his head. A
few of papa’s notions are just molasses, but most
of ’em are like plaster of Paris;—if you don’t change
’em in a hurry before they set you never <span class="it">can</span>
change ’em! That’s the trouble just now; he’s turned
into plaster of Paris about poor Dan’s land operations,
confound him!”</p>

<p class="pindent">She uttered this denunciation with a sharpness of
emphasis not ill-natured, but earnest enough to make
Harlan look at her seriously across the small table
just set between them by a coloured housemaid.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You’ve been trying to alter your father’s opinion
of Dan’s commercial ability, have you?” he inquired.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, I have,” she answered crisply. “What’s
the matter with the business men of this town, anyway?
Why won’t they help Dan do a big thing?”</p>

<p class="pindent">At this Harlan allowed his eyes to fall from the
troubled and yet spirited inquiry of her direct gaze;
he looked at the cup he accepted from her, and
frowned slightly as he answered: “Of course they
think he’s a visionary. The most enthusiastic home
boomer in the lot doesn’t dream the town’ll ever
reach out as far as Dan’s foolish ‘Addition.’ ”</p>

<p class="pindent">“How do you know it’s foolish?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, because the population would have to
double to reach even the edge of his land, and this
town hasn’t the kind of impetus that develops suburbs.
You know what sort of place it is, yourself,
Martha. It’s only an overgrown market-town, and
an overgrown market-town is what it’ll always be.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Don’t you like it?” she asked challengingly.
“Don’t you even like the town you were born in and
grew up in?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“That sounds like Dan. His latest phase is to
become oratorical about the enormous future of our
own, our native city—since he bought the Ornaby
farm! I suppose I like it as well as I like any city
except Florence. I don’t think it’s as ugly as New
York, for instance, because the long stretches of big
shade trees palliate our streets half the year, and
nothing palliates the unevenness and everlasting tearing
down and building up and digging and blasting
and steam-riveting of New York. But I do hate the
crudeness of things here.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“That’s the old, old cheap word for us,” she said,
“ ‘Crude!’ ”</p>

<p class="pindent">Harlan laughed. “You <span class="it">have</span> been listening to
Dan, the civic patriot! Crudeness isn’t <span class="it">our</span> specialty;
the whole country’s crude, Martha.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Compared to what? China?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You’ll be telling me all about our literary societies
and women’s clubs and the factories, if I
don’t take care,” he returned lightly. “How dreadful
all that is!” He sighed, and continued: “I
suppose you’ve been trying to convince your father
he ought to extend one of his street-car lines out into
the wilderness toward Dan’s ‘Addition.’ Is that
what you’ve been up to with the old gentleman,
Martha?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, it is,” she said quickly. “If he doesn’t,
how are people to get out there?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Quite so! That’s one reason why everybody
downtown is laughing at Dan. Your father will
never do it, Martha. Have you any idea he will?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Not much of one,” she admitted sadly, and shook
her head. “He doesn’t understand Dan’s theory
that the car line would pay for itself by fares from
the people who’d build along the line.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, I shouldn’t think he’d understand that—at
least not very sympathetically!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Dan isn’t discouraged, is he?” she asked.</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, he isn’t the temperament to be discouraged
by anything. It’s a matter of disposition, not of
facts, and Dan was born to be a helpless optimist
all his life. For instance, he still believes that when
he marries his Miss McMillan and brings her here
to live, grandmother will learn to like her! Yet
he ought to know by this time that grandmother’s a
perfect duplicate of your father in the matter of
plaster of Paris. I suppose you’ve seen Miss McMillan’s
photograph, Martha?”</p>

<p class="pindent">Harlan glanced at her as if casually, but she answered
without any visible embarrassment: “Oh,
yes; he brought it over, and talked of her a whole
evening. If the photograph’s like her——” She
paused.</p>

<p class="pindent">“It’s one of those photographs that <span class="it">are</span> like,”
Harlan observed. “My own judgment is that she’s
not precisely the girl to put on a pair of overalls and
go out and help Dan clear the underbrush off his
‘Addition.’ ”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Is he doing that himself? I haven’t seen him
for days and days.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No,” said Harlan. “You wouldn’t, because he
<span class="it">is</span> doing just about that. I believe he has five or
six darkies helping him; but he keeps overalls for
himself out there in a shed. He gets up before six,
drives out in his runabout, with a nose-bag of oats
for his horse under the seat, and he gets home after
dark ready to drop, but still talking about what a
success he’s going to make of the great and only
‘Ornaby Addition.’ He wears shabby clothes all
the time—he seems not to care at all how he looks—and
Saturdays he comes home at noon and spends
the rest of the day downtown making orations to
bankers and business men, especially your father.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“To no effect at all,” Martha said gloomily.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, but I think he’s had an extraordinarily distinct
effect!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What effect is it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, I’m afraid,” Harlan said slowly;—“I’m
afraid he’s been successful in making himself the
laughing stock of the town.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“They—they think he’s just a joke?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Not ‘just’ one,” the precise Harlan replied.
“They think he’s the biggest one they’ve ever seen.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Martha uttered a sound of angry protest, though
she did not speak at once, but stared frowningly at
the fire; then she turned abruptly to Harlan. “Why
don’t you help him?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I? Well, he hasn’t asked me to help him, precisely.
Did he tell you I——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No; he didn’t say anything about you. But
why don’t you?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“As a matter of fact,” Harlan explained, a little
annoyed, “he didn’t ask me for help, but he did want
me to go in with him on strictly business grounds. He
was certain that if I joined him as a partner, it would
be a great thing for both of us. He wanted me to do
the same thing he did—invest what grandfather left
me in making the Ornaby farm blossom with horrible
bungalows and corner drug stores.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“And you wouldn’t,” Martha said affirmatively.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why should I, since I don’t believe in his
scheme?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But why couldn’t you believe in Dan himself?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Good heavens!” Harlan exclaimed, and uttered
a sound of impatient laughter. “I’ve never looked
upon Dan as precisely a genius, Martha. Besides,
even if by a miracle he could do something of what
he dreams he can, what on earth would be the use
of it? It would only be an extension of ugliness
into a rather inoffensive landscape. I don’t believe
he can do it in the first place; and in the second,
I don’t believe in doing it even if it can be
done.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Don’t you?” she asked, and looked at him
thoughtfully. “What do you believe in, Harlan?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“A number of things,” he said gravely. “For
instance, I don’t believe in kicking up a lot of dust
and confusion to turn a nice old farm into horrible-looking
lots with hideous signboards blaring all over
’em.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“How characteristic!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What is?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I asked you what you believed in,” she explained.
“You said you believed in ‘a number of things,’
and went straight on: ‘For instance, I don’t believe——’ ”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes,” he said, “I was keeping to the argument
about Dan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Martha laughed at his calm sophistry, but was
content to seem to accept it and to waive her point.
“What do your father and mother think of ‘Ornaby
Addition’?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, you know them! They understand as well
as anybody that it’s all folly, but they don’t say so
to Dan. I think poor father would even put something
in just to please Dan, if he could spare it after
what he’s lost in bad loans this year.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“How about Mrs. Savage?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Grandmother!” Harlan was amused at this
suggestion. “Dan has to keep away from her;
she’s taken such a magnificently healthy prejudice
against his little Miss McMillan she won’t talk to
him about anything else, and Dan can’t stand it.
Not much chance for ‘Ornaby’ there, Martha!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No; she <span class="it">is</span> a plaster of Paris old thing!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Inordinately. She’s always been set about <span class="it">me</span>,
Martha,” Harlan remarked with a ruefulness in
which there was a measure of philosophic amusement.
“She’s always maintained that I’d never
amount to anything—I have the terrible faults of
being an egotist and smoking cigarettes—but she’s
sometimes admitted she thought Dan might. That’s
why she’s furious with him about throwing himself
away on this ‘spoiled ninny of a photograph girl’—her
usual way of referring to Miss McMillan.
Grandmother’s twice as furious with him as if she
hadn’t always been like you, Martha.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Like me? How?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I mean about your feeling toward Dan and me.”
Harlan smiled, but his eyes were expressive of something
far from amusement. It was as if here he referred
to an old and troubling puzzlement of his,
but had long ago resigned himself to the impossibility
of finding a solution. “I mean she’s like you
because she’s always thought so much more of Dan
than she has of me, Martha.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Perhaps it’s because you’ve never seemed to
think much of anything, yourself,” she said gently.
“Perhaps we’re apt to like people best who do a great
deal of liking themselves.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I might like to have you like me, Martha,”
Harlan ventured, and there was a quiet wistfulness
about him then that touched her. “I might like it
better than you know.”</p>

<p class="pindent">She looked at him gravely. “I do like you,” she
said. “I like you anyhow; but even if I didn’t,
I’d like you because you’re Dan’s brother.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Harlan sighed, but contrived a smile to accompany
his sigh. “Yes; I’ve always understood that,
Martha; and you’re not at all peculiar in your preference.
Not only you and grandmother, but everybody
else likes Dan much better than me.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“And yet,” Martha said, a smouldering glow in her
kind eyes, “you tell me that everybody’s laughing
at him.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Haven’t you heard so yourself?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, I have,” she cried angrily. “But how can
they, if they like him?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Isn’t it plain enough? They like him because
he’s a democratic, friendly soul, and they laugh at
him because he’s so absurd about the Ornaby farm.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“And you think he’s got to do the whole thing absolutely
alone?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, no,” Harlan said, correcting her lightly,
“I don’t think he’s going to be able to do the whole
thing at all. He’ll get part way and then of course
he’ll have to quit, because his money’ll give out.
What he has left may last him a year or even longer,
if he keeps on just doing with his little gang of
darkies and himself.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“And in the meantime, he’ll also keep on being a
‘laughing stock?’ That’s what you said, didn’t
you?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t think it was an exaggeration,” Harlan returned,
defending himself, for her tone was sharply
accusing. “After all,” he went on, with placative
lightness, “isn’t it even rather a triumph in its way?
You see, Martha, it isn’t every young man of his age
who’d be well enough known to occupy that position.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“A laughing stock?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, yes. Don’t you see it means a degree of
prominence not at all within the reach of every Tom,
Dick, and Harry. For instance, <span class="it">I</span> couldn’t touch it:
I don’t know enough people; but Dan’s one of those
men of whom it’s said, ‘Oh, everybody in town knows
<span class="it">him!</span>’ So, you see, since he’s run wild over this
Ornaby Addition, why, he actually has the whole
town laughing at him.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Since he’s run wild!” she echoed scornfully.
“And you say you don’t exaggerate! How has he
‘run wild?’ ”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Ask your father,” was Harlan’s response, delivered
quietly, though with some irritation; and
Martha said sharply that she would, indeed; but this
was mere retort, signifying no genuine intention on
her part, for she knew well enough what her father
would say. He had been saying it over and over,
every evening of late; and her discussions with him
of Dan Oliphant and “Ornaby Addition” had
reached that point of feeble acrimony at which a participant
with any remnant of wisdom falls back upon
a despairing silence—a silence despairing of the opponent’s
sanity. Martha had no mind to release
her father from the oppression of this silence of hers,
merely to hear him repeat himself.</p>

<p class="pindent">She knew, moreover, that Harlan had not far overshot
the mark when he intimated that Dan had become
the laughing stock of the town; nor was it
grossly an exaggeration to describe him as “making
orations to bankers and business men, especially
your father.” The enthusiast for “Ornaby Addition”
had indeed become somewhat oratorical upon
his great subject; and the bankers and business
men to whom he made speeches not only laughed
about him, as did their secretaries and clerks and
stenographers, distributing this humour widely, but
often they laughed at him and rallied him, interrupting
him as he prophesied coming splendours.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You’ll see!” he would answer, laughing himself,
albeit rather plaintively. “You can sit there and
make all the fun o’ me you want to, but the day’ll
come when you’ll wish you’d had a hand in makin’
this city what it <span class="it">is</span> goin’ to be made! It isn’t only
the money you’d get out of it, but the pride you’d
take in it, and what you’d be able to tell your grandchildren
about it. Why, gentlemen, ten years from
now——” Then he would go on painting his air
castles for them while they chuckled or sometimes
grew noisily hilarious.</p>

<p class="pindent">But the toughest and most powerful of them all
declined to chuckle; there was little good-nature and
no hilarity left in dry old Mr. Shelby. He was
seventy, and, as he crisply expressed himself, at his
age he hated to have his time wasted for him; he
didn’t see any pleasure in listening to the goings-on
of a fool-boy about two minutes out of school! This
viewpoint he went so far as to communicate to Dan
directly, as the latter stood before him in the old
gentleman’s office. For that matter, Mr. Shelby
seldom cared to be anything except direct; it was
his declared belief that directness was the only thing
that paid, in the long run. “Usin’ a lot of tact and
all that stuff to spare touchy people’s vanity, it’s
all a waste of energy and they only hate you worse
in the long run,” he said. “So I’m not goin’ to
trouble to use any tact on <span class="it">you</span>, young Mr. Dan Oliphant!”</p>

<p class="pindent">He was a formidable old figure as he sat in his mahogany
swivel-chair, which every instant threatened
to swing him about to face his big, clean desk again
with his back to the visitor. Neat with an extremity
of precision, this old man had not altered perceptibly
in appearance for many years, not even in his clothes;
he was now exactly as he was in Dan’s childhood.
The gray chin-beard was the same precisely trimmed
short oblong, and no whiter; the same incessant
slight frown was set between the thin gray eyebrows;
the same small black necktie showed a reticent bow
beneath the flat white collar that was too large for
the emaciated neck; and the same clean white waistcoat
was worn under the same black “cutaway” coat;
the same gray-and-black-striped trousers descended
to the same patent-leather “congress gaiters.”
Twice a year Mr. Shelby gave an order—always the
same order—to his tailor; he never left his house in
the evening; had not taken any exercise whatever
since his youth; went to bed always at nine o’clock;
always ate exactly the same breakfast of oatmeal, an
egg, and one cup of coffee; was never even slightly
indisposed; and appeared to be everlasting. Compared
to such a man, granite or basalt might be
imagined as of an amiable plasticity; yet the ardent
Dan hopefully persisted in seeking to remodel him.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, of course, Mr. Shelby,” he assented;—“that’s
just the way I want you to feel; I don’t
want you to use any tact on me. I don’t need it.
When I’m layin’ out a proposition like this before a
real business man, all I want is his attention to the
facts.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What facts?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“The facts of the future,” the enthusiast replied
instantly. “The future——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What d’you mean talkin’ about the facts of the
future? There ain’t any facts in the future. How
you goin’ to have any facts that haven’t happened
yet? A fact is something that’s either happened or
<span class="it">is</span> happening right now.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, sir!” Dan exclaimed. “The present is only
a fraction of a second, if it’s even that much; the past
isn’t any time at all—it’s gone; everything that
amounts to anything is in the future. The future
is all that’s worth anybody’s thinkin’ about. That’s
why I want you to think about the future of your
car lines, Mr. Shelby.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, you do, do you?” the old gentleman said
sardonically. “You think I <span class="it">ain’t</span> thinkin’ about it,
so you called around for the fourth time to draw my
attention to it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, sir,” the undaunted young man replied.
“I don’t mean exactly you don’t think about it; I
just mean you don’t seem to me to consider all the
possibilities.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Such as old Ranse Ornaby’s ex-hog-wallow and
corn-patch, for instance?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“That ex-hog-wallow and corn-patch, Mr. Shelby,”
Dan said proudly, “consists of five hundred and
thirty-one and two-thirds acres. If you’d only drive
out there in your carriage as I’ve asked you to——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Good heavens!” Mr. Shelby interrupted. “I
chopped wood there thirty years before you were
born! D’you think I got to hitch up and go buggy-ridin’
to know where Ranse Ornaby’s farm is?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It isn’t his, sir,” Dan reminded him. “It belongs
to me. I only meant, if you’d come out there
I think you’d see some changes since I’ve been layin’
it out in city lots.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“City lots? What city you talkin’ about? Where’s
any city in that part o’ the county? <span class="it">I</span> never knew
there was any city up that way.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But there is, sir!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What’s the name of it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“The city of the future!” Dan proclaimed, his
eyes brightening as he heard his own phrase. “<span class="it">This</span>
city when it begins to reach its growth! Why, in
ten years from now——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Ten years from now!” the old man echoed, with
angry mockery. “What in Constantinople you
talkin’ about? D’you know you’re gettin’ to be a
regular by-word in this town? Old George Rowe
told me yesterday at his bank, he says you got a nickname
like some Indian. It’s ‘Young Ten-Years-From-Now.’
That’s what they call you: ‘Young
Ten-Years-From-Now’! George Rowe asked me:
he says, ‘Has Young Ten-Years-From-Now been
around your way makin’ any more speeches?’ he
says. He says that’s the nickname everybody’s got
for you. It’s all over town, he says.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan’s colour heightened, but he laughed and said:
“Well, I expect I can stand it. It isn’t a mean
nickname, particularly, and I don’t guess they intend
any harm by it. I shouldn’t be surprised if
it turned out to be good advertisin’ for the Addition,
Mr. Shelby.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“<span class="it">I</span> should,” the old man remarked promptly.
“I’d be surprised if anything turned out good for the
Addition!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No,” said Dan. “That nickname might do a
lot o’ good; though the truth is I’m not talkin’ about
ten years from now nearly as much as I am about only
two or three years from now. <span class="it">Ten</span> years from now
this city’ll be way out <span class="it">beyond</span> Ornaby Addition!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, lord! Hear him holler!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It will,” Dan insisted, his colour glowing the
more. “It will! Why, you go down to the East
Side in New York and look at the way people are
crowded, with millions and millions more every year
tryin’ to find footroom. They can’t do it! They’ve
<span class="it">got</span> to go <span class="it">some</span>where. They’ve got to spread all
over the country. Thousands and hundreds of
thousands of ’em have got to come <span class="it">here</span>. That’s
not all; we’ve got the finest climate in the world,
and the babies that get born here practically all of
’em <span class="it">live</span>, and there’s tens of thousands of ’em born
every year. Besides that, this city’s not only the
natural market of a tremendous agricultural area,
but the railroads make it an absolutely ideal manufacturing
centre. Why, it’s just naturally impossible
to <span class="it">stop</span> the growth that’s comin’, even if anybody
wanted to, and the funny thing to me is that so few
of you business men see it!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You listen to me,” the old man said;—“that is,
unless you got the habit of talkin’ so much you
<span class="it">can’t</span> listen! You been tellin’ the men that run this
town quite a few things about our own business
lately; it’s time somebody told you something about
your own. You’re a good deal like your grandfather
Savage used to be before your grandmother sat on
him and never let him up. He was always wantin’
to put his money into any fool thing and lose it,
until she did that, and I hear she tried to stop <span class="it">you</span>,
but you didn’t have the gumption to see she’s right.
Now, look here: I’ve been here since there was a
population of seven hundred people chillin’ every
other day, eatin’ quinine by the handful, and draggin’
one foot after the other out of two-foot mud if they
had to get off a horse and walk anywhere. Last
census we had a hundred and eighty thousand. I’ve
seen it all! D’you expect you can tell <span class="it">me</span> anything
about this town?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, sir; not about the history of it or anything
that’s past. But about the future——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You listen!” Shelby commanded irascibly. “You
come around here blowin’ out your chest and tellin’
us old settlers that this town has grown some——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, sir; I know you know all about that a thousand
times better’n I do. I only use it to prove the
town’s goin’ to keep <span class="it">on</span> growin’. Why, Mr. Shelby,
ten years from now——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Great Gee-mun-nently!” the old man shouted.
“Can’t you listen at <span class="it">all?</span> Of <span class="it">course</span> it’s goin’ to
keep on growin’, but not the way you think it is.
It’s already reached its land size, or mighty near it,
because there’s plenty vacant lots inside the city
limits—hunderds and hunderds of ’em—and people
want to live near their business; they don’t want to
go way out in the country where there ain’t any
sewers nor any gas nor city water.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But they’ll <span class="it">get</span> all that, Mr. Shelby. They will
as soon as there’s enough of ’em to make it pay the
water company and the gas company to run their
pipes out; and there’d <span class="it">be</span> enough of ’em, if you’d lay
even a single track out to——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Out to Ranse Ornaby’s frog pond!” the old man
interrupted angrily. “You think if I’d throw away a
hundred thousand dollars like so much dirt, that’d
bring the millennium to the old hog-wallow, do you,
young man? Look out that window behind you.
What’s the biggest thing you see?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“The First National Bank Building.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, sir. Eleven stories high, and the Sheridan
Trust Company’s got plans to put up a block higher’n
that. People’ll build up in the air, not only for
business, but to live in flats, but they won’t go ’way
out to a hog-wallow in the country when there ain’t
a reason on earth for ’em to. You seem to think
people ride on street-cars for pleasure! Well, I’ve
had some experience in the business, and I can tell
you they don’t, except in mighty hot weather; they
ride on street-cars to get somewhere they want to
<span class="it">go</span>; and goodness knows nobody wants to go to
Ranse Ornaby’s farm.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But, Mr. Shelby, if you’d listen just a minute——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’ve listened all I’m a-goin’ to,” the old man said
decisively. “This is the fourth time you been here
tellin’ me all about this town that wouldn’t be here
if it wasn’t for me and some the other men you been
lecturin’ to about it. You go at me as if I’d just
put up at the hotel and never saw the place before,
and what’s worse you’ve gone and got Martha so she
keeps ding-dongin’ at me till I can’t eat my supper in
peace! It’s about time for you to understand it’s
no use.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But, Mr. Shelby, if you’d just let me put the
<span class="it">facts</span> before you——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Facts about what’s goin’ to happen ten years
from now? No, sir!” The swivel-chair began to
turn, making it clear that this interview had drawn
to a close. “I thank you, but I can make up my
own facts, if I so desire!” And the back of the chair
and its occupant were offered to the view of the caller.</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan made a final effort. “Mr. Shelby, I hope you
don’t mean this for your last word on the subject,
because just as sure as you’re born the day will
come when——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Will it?” the old man interrupted; and turned
his head angrily, so that his neat beard was thrust
upward by his shoulder and seemed to bristle. “You
go teach your grandma Savage to suck eggs,” he
said with fierce mockery, “but don’t come around
here any more tellin’ <span class="it">me</span> where I better lay my car
tracks!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, sir, I——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“That’s <span class="it">all!</span>”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, sir,” Dan said, a little depressed for the
moment.</p>

<p class="pindent">But in the hall, outside the office, he recovered his
cheerfulness, and, after consulting a memorandum
book, decided to call on Mr. George Howe, the president
of the First National Bank. Since yesterday
Dan had thought of several new things that were
certain to happen within the next ten years.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER VII</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="dropcap">N</span>O FIGURE was more familiar to the downtown
streets of those days than that of the
young promoter of Ornaby Addition. Always
in a hurry and usually with eyes fixed on what
appeared to be something important in the distance,
he had the air of a man hastening to complete a
profitable transaction before traintime. Now and
then, as he strode along, his coat blowing out behind
him in the spring breeze, his gaze would be not upon
the distance, but eagerly engaged in computations,
with the aid of a shabby memorandum book and an
obviously dangerous fountain pen. Moreover, the
shabbiness of the memorandum book was not out
of keeping with the rest of him; for here again Harlan’s
sketch of his brother failed to exaggerate.
Dan’s metropolitan gloss had disappeared almost in
a day, and though it might make a brief reappearance
upon Sundays, when he walked to church with
his mother and swung the gold-topped cane as he
talked earnestly to her of Ornaby Addition, yet for
the rest of the week he did seem to be almost unconscious,
as Harlan said, of what he wore; so much
so that his mother gently scolded him about it.</p>

<p class="pindent">“What will people think of me,” she asked, “if
you insist on going about with two buttons off your
vest, and looking as if you haven’t had anything
pressed since the flood? Whenever I do get one of
your suits to look respectable, you wear it out to the
farm and forget to put your overalls on, and then
you climb trees, I suppose, or something else as destructive;
and after that you rush off downtown
where everybody sees you looking like the Old
Scratch—that’s what your father said, and it troubles
him, too, dear. You were so particular all through
college, always just the very pink of fashion, and now,
all of a sudden, you’ve changed the way some young
men do when they’ve married and get careworn
over having two or three babies at home. Won’t
you try to reform, dear?”</p>

<p class="pindent">He laughed and petted her, and went on as before,
unreformed. Clerks, glancing out of the great plate-glass
windows of a trust company, would giggle as
they saw him hurrying by on his way from one
office to another, rehearsing to himself as he went and
disfiguring his memorandum book with hasty new
mathematics. “There it goes again!” they would
say, perhaps. “Big Chief Ten-Years-From-Now,
rushin’ the season in year-before-last’s straw hat and
a Seymour coat! Look at him talkin’ to his old
notebook, though! Guess that’s about all he’s
got left he <span class="it">can</span> talk to without gettin’ laughed to
death!”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan found one listener, however, who did not
laugh, but listened to him without interruption,
until the oration was concluded, although it was unduly
protracted under the encouragement of such
benevolent circumstance. This was Mr. Joseph
Kohn, the father of Dan’s former partner in the ornamental
bracket business. Kohn &amp; Sons was an establishment
formerly mentioned by National Avenue
as a “cheap Jew dry-goods store”; and prosperous
housewives usually laughed apologetically about anything
they happened to have bought there. But, as
the years went by, the façade of Kohn &amp; Sons widened;
small shops on each side were annexed, and
the “cheap dry-goods store” was spoken of as a
“cheap department store,” until in time it became
customary to omit the word “cheap.” Old Joe
Kohn was one of the directors of the First National
Bank; he enjoyed the friendship of the president of
that institution, and was mentioned in a tone of respect
by even the acrid Shelby.</p>

<p class="pindent">In the presence of this power in the land, then,
Dan was profuse of his utmost possible eloquence.
Unchecked, he became even grandiose, while the
quiet figure at the desk smoked a cigar thoughtfully;
and young Sam Kohn, not yet admitted to partnership
with his father and older brother, but a floor-walker
in the salesrooms below, sat with his elbows
on his knees and his chin on his fists, listening with
admiration.</p>

<p class="pindent">“My gracious, Dan,” he said, when the conclusion
at last appeared to have been reached;—“you
are certainly a natural-born goods seller! I wish we
had you on the road for us.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, Sam,” his father agreed pleasantly. “He
talks pretty good. I don’t know as I seldom heard
no better.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But what do you think of it?” the eager Dan
urged. “What I want to know: Don’t you think
I’ve made my case? Don’t you believe that Ornaby
Addition——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Let’s wait a minute,” Mr. Kohn interrupted
quietly. “Let’s listen here a minute. First, there’s
the distance. You say yourself Shelby says he
ain’t goin’ to put no car line out there; and it’s true
he ain’t.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But I told you I haven’t given that up, Mr.
Kohn. I expect to have another talk with Mr.
Shelby next week.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“<span class="it">He</span> don’t,” Mr. Kohn remarked. “He spoke to
me yesterday a good deal about it at bank directors’
meeting. No, Mr. Oliphant; don’t you expect it.
You ain’t goin’ to git no car line until you got people
out there, and how can you git people out there till
you git a car line? Now wait!” With a placative
gesture he checked Dan, who had instantly begun
to explain that with enough capital the Addition
could build its own tracks. “Wait a minute,” Mr.
Kohn went on. “If you can’t git enough capital
for your Addition how could you git it for a car line,
too? No, Mr. Oliphant; but I want to tell you I
got some idea maybe you’re right about how this
city’s goin’ to grow. I’ve watched it for thirty years,
and also I know something myself how the people
been comin’ from Europe, and how they’re still
comin’. It ain’t only them;—people come to the
cities from the country like they didn’t used to.
The more they git a little bit education, the more
they want to live in a city; that’s where you’re goin’
to git a big puportion the people you claim’s goin’
to crowd in here.</p>

<p class="pindent">“But listen a minute, Mr. Oliphant; that there
Ornaby’s farm is awful far out in the country. Now
wait! I’m tellin’ <span class="it">you</span> now, Mr. Oliphant, please.
Times are changin’ because all the time we git so
much new invented machinery. Workin’ people are
willin’ to live some ways from where they work, even
if they ain’t on a car line. Why is that? It’s because
they can’t afford a horse and buggy, but now
they got bicycles. But you can’t git ’em to live as
far out as that there Ornaby’s farm, even with bicycles,
because except in summer the roads ain’t
nothing but mud or frozen ruts and snow, and you
can’t git no asphalt street put out there. The city
council wouldn’t ever——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Not to-day,” Dan admitted. “I don’t expect to
do this all in a week or so, Mr. Kohn. But ten years
from now——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes; that’s it!” Mr. Kohn interrupted. “You
come around and talk to me ten years from now
about it, and I might put some money into it then.
To-day I can’t see it. All at the same time if I was
you I wouldn’t be discouraged. I won’t put a cent
in it, Mr. Oliphant, because the way it stands now,
it don’t look to me like no good proposition. But
you already got your own money in; you should go
ahead and not git discouraged because who can
swear you won’t git it out again? Many’s the time
I seen a man git his money out and clean up nice
when everybody believed against him, the way
they all believe against this here Ornaby’s farm right
to-day.” He rose from his chair and offered his
hand. “I got a business date, Mr. Oliphant, so I
must excuse. I’m glad to talk with you because
you’re old friends with Sam here, and he always
speaks so much about you at our family meals at the
home. Good-bye, Mr. Oliphant;—I only got to say
I’m wishin’ you good luck, and hope you keep on at
it till you win. You got as good a chance as many a
man, so don’t give it up.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan repeated the last four words a little ruefully
as he went down in the elevator with Sam, who was
his escort. “ ‘Don’t give it up.’ Well, not very
likely!” He laughed at the idea of giving it up;
then sighed reflectively. “Well, anyhow, he’s the
first one I’ve talked to that said it. Most of the
others just had a grand time laughin’ at me and told
me <span class="it">to</span> give it up! I appreciate your father’s friendliness,
Sam.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Sam shook his head. “It ain’t that exactly,” he
said, with a cautious glance at the young man who
operated the elevator. “Wait a minute and I’ll tell
you.” And when they had emerged upon the ground
floor, he followed his friend through the busy aisles
and out to the sidewalk. “It’s this way, Dan,” he
said. “You ain’t got any bigger ideas of how we’re
goin’ to have a great city here than what papa has;
he don’t talk so much in public, as it were, the way
you been doin’, but home I wonder how many thousand
times we got to listen to him! That’s why you
had him so interested he sat still like that. But he
ain’t goin’ to put money in it now. I know papa
awful well; it ain’t his way. I wouldn’t say it to
anybody but you, Dan, but I expect right now he’ll
own a good many shares stock in that Ornaby farm
some day.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What?” Dan cried, surprised. “Why, you just
said——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I said he won’t put money in now,” Sam explained,
with a look of some compassion. “Papa
won’t ever take a gamble, Dan; he ain’t the kind.
He’ll wait till you go broke on this Ornaby farm;
then, if it looks good by that time, he’ll get a couple
his business friends in with him, maybe, and they’ll
send some feller after dark to buy it for thirty-five
cents. He wouldn’t never mean you no ill will by
it, though, Dan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, I know that,” Dan said, and laughed. “But
you’re mistaken about one thing, Sam, and so’s he,
if he counts on it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What’s that?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’m not goin’ broke on it. Why, Sam, ten years
from now——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You told papa all about that,” Sam interrupted
hurriedly. “You talked fine about it, and I wish
I could run off an argument half as good. It’s a
shame when a man’s got a line o’ talk like that he
ain’t got a good proposition behind it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But it <span class="it">is</span> good. Why, even <span class="it">two</span> years from
now——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes; by then it might be,” Sam said. “But now
you got an awful hard gang to get any backin’ out
of in the business men of our city, Dan. They
didn’t make their money so easy they’re willin’ to
take a chance once in a while, you see.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I expect so,” Dan sighed; and then, consulting
his memorandum book, shook hands with this
sympathetic friend and hurried away to see if he
could obtain another interview with John W. Johns,
the president of the Chamber of Commerce. He was
successful to just that extent; he was readily
granted the hearing, but failed to arouse a more
serious interest in Ornaby Addition than had
hitherto been shown by this too-humorous official.</p>

<p class="pindent">Mr. Johns was cordial, told Dan that he did “just
actually love to listen about Ornaby Addition”;
that he was always delighted to listen when he had
the time, and went on to mention that he had said
openly to the whole Chamber at the Chamber’s
Friday lunch, “Why, to hear young Dan Oliphant
take on about Ornaby Addition, it’s as good as a
variety show any day!” Mr. Johns was by no
means unfriendly; on the contrary, he ended by becoming
complimentary on the subject of Dan’s good
nature. “Of course, you aren’t goin’ to get any
business man to sink a dollar in that old farm, my
boy; but I do like the way you stand up to the roastin’
you get about it. ’Tisn’t every young fellow
your age could take everybody’s whoopin’ and hollerin’
about him without gettin’ pretty hot under
the collar.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, no,” Dan said. “If I can get some of you
to put in a little money, I don’t care how you laugh.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But you can’t,” Mr. Johns pointed out. “That’s
why I kind o’ like the way you take it. We don’t
put in a cent, and we get hunderds of dollars’ worth
o’ fun out of it!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I guess that’s so,” Dan admitted, and he went
away somewhat crestfallen in spite of Mr. Johns’s
compliment.</p>

<p class="pindent">As Sam Kohn said, these men of business had not
made their money easily; they had made it by persistent
caution and shrewdness, by patient saving,
and by self-denial in the days of their youth; they
were not the men to “take a chance once in a while.”
Orations delighted them but would never convince
them; and as the weeks and months went by, Dan
began to understand that if Ornaby Addition was to
be saved, he alone would have to save it.</p>

<p class="pindent">He worked himself thin at the task; for he was far
from losing heart and never admitted even to himself
that he was attempting an impossibility. His
letters to Lena were filled with Ornaby Addition, of
which her own ideas appeared to be so indefinite that
sometimes he wondered if she didn’t “skip” in her
perusal of his missives. She wrote him:</p>

<div class="blockquote100percent">

<p class="pindent"><span style="font-size:smaller">It seems to me you must spend a great deal of time over that
Ornaby thing. Is it really so beautifully interesting as you say
it is? Of course I do understand you’re immensely keen on it
though, and I’m glad it will be such a great success and all that.
I certainly hope it will because as I warned you I’m an extravagant
little wretch and always in a row with papa about it. But
I do hope you don’t feel you’ll have to spend lots of time out there
after we’re married. Of course we must be as practical—disgusting
word!—as we can, but I do hope you’ll arrange so that
you won’t need to do more out West than just oversee this
Ornaby affair for a week or so every year, because I adore you
and I’ll want you to be with me all the time.</span></p>

<p class="pindent"><span style="font-size:smaller">Cousin Oliver has some works—I don’t know what it is they
make but I think it’s metal things for plumbers or something
equally heinous!—and <span class="it">his</span> works are out in the West somewhere,
too. He only has to go there once or twice a year and gets home
again the next night. I do hope you’ll be sure to make arrangements
like that about yours. At any rate, be sure not to have
to go out there <span class="it">next</span> year, not unless you just hate your poor Me!
I couldn’t bear for anything to interfere with our having a full
year abroad. I won’t let you leave me in Nice or Mentone and
run back to your old Ornaby thing for weeks and weeks! If you
dare to try anything like that, sir, I’ll flirt my little head off with
some dashing maître d’hôtel! Write instantly and tell me
nothing shall spoil our full year abroad together. Instantly!
Or I’ll think you hate me!</span></p>

</div>

<p class="pindent">This letter gave Dan a bad hour as he sat in his
room at home trying to construct a reply to it. The
full year abroad now considered so definite by Lena
had been rather sketchily mentioned between them
in New York; he had agreed, with a faint and concealed
uneasiness, that a wedding journey to southern
France, if he could “manage” it, would be lovely;
but afterwards he had forgotten all about it; and,
being in his twenties, he was yet to learn how often
the casual implications of men in their tender moments
are construed by women to be attested bonds,
sworn to, signed and sealed. So now, as he answered
Lena, he found himself on the defensive, as if the
impossibility of the full year abroad were a wrong
to her, an unintended one, but nevertheless a wrong
for him to explain and for her to forgive. He added
to his opening explanations:</p>

<div class="blockquote100percent">

<p class="pindent"><span style="font-size:smaller">We <span class="it">might</span> go to Europe two or three years from now. Of
course I don’t expect to make the Addition my life work. I hope
to be going into other things as soon as I’ve put this on its own
feet. You show you’ve got a wonderful business head in your
letter, dear, because a man’s business <span class="it">ought</span> to be just the way
you say—it ought to be so he only needs to oversee it. The
broad principles of business aren’t often understood by a woman,
and it makes me proud that you are one of the few who can.
You do understand them so well I see it must be my own fault I
haven’t given you the right idea about Ornaby Addition. For
one thing, you see, an addition isn’t a works exactly, though not
as unlike as it might seem, because both need a great deal of attention
and energy to get them started. What I am trying to
do is to lay out an Addition to the city, making streets and building
lots that afterwhile will become part of the city, and my land
won’t be really an addition until that is accomplished. It is a
wonderful piece of land, with superb trees and good clean air,
though I have to cut down many of the trees, which I hate to do,
in order to lay out the building lots.</span></p>

<p class="pindent"><span style="font-size:smaller">What troubles me so much since reading your last letter is
that I don’t see any way to leave here at all, except for a few days
for our wedding and a stop at Niagara Falls if you would like that—it
is a sight you ought to see, dear, and well worth the time—on
our way here. I’m afraid I didn’t think enough about the
trip abroad when we spoke of it and didn’t fully understand it
was a settled thing, as you do. That is all my fault and I’m
going to be mighty sorry if this is a big disappointment to you.
I would sooner cut off my right hand than let anything be a disappointment
to you, Lena, and I don’t know just how it happened
that I didn’t know before how much you were counting on
spending the year in Europe.</span></p>

<p class="pindent"><span style="font-size:smaller">Another thing that hurts me and I hardly know how to speak
of it is this: I ought to have consulted you before I plunged into
this work—I see that now—but I got so enthusiastic over it I
just went ahead, and now it’s impossible for me not to keep <span class="it">on</span>
going ahead with it, and that means we <span class="it">have</span> to live <span class="it">here</span>, Lena.
I did hope to persuade you to be willing for us to live here, but I
only hoped to persuade you to it, and now I’m afraid this may
look to you as if I forced it on you. That would just break my
heart, to have you believe it, and I never thought of such an
aspect when I bought the Ornaby farm. I just thought it would
be a big thing and make us a fortune and help build up my city.
But now it’s done and all my money’s tied up in it, we’ll have to
settle down till the job’s put through—don’t ever doubt it’s going
to be a big thing; but I see how you <span class="it">might</span> look at it. If you do
look at it as forcing you, please just try to forgive me and believe
I did mean for the best for both of us, Lena, dear.</span></p>

<p class="pindent"><span style="font-size:smaller">My mother and father want us to live with them, and I think
it would be the best and most sensible thing for us to do. There’s
a great deal of room and if we rented a house we couldn’t get a
very comfortable or good-looking one, I’m afraid, because all we
can possibly spare of what I have left will just <span class="it">have</span> to go into
the Addition.</span></p>

<p class="pindent"><span style="font-size:smaller">I’m so afraid this letter will worry you. I don’t know what to
do or what else to say except please write as soon as you can to
tell me how it strikes you, and if you can say so please say you
don’t think I meant to force our living here, and you still care
something about me.</span></p>

<p class="pindent"><span style="font-size:smaller">The trouble is you don’t know what a great place to live this
is, because you haven’t ever been anywhere except a few places
East and Europe. You would soon get used to the difference
between living here and New York and after that you’d never
want to live anywhere else. Of course it’s mighty pleasant to
go to New York or Europe for a visit now and then, and most of
the people you’d meet here do that, just as you and I would
hope to when we could afford it, but for a place to settle down
and <span class="it">live</span> in, I know you’d get to feeling we’ve got the most satisfactory
one on the face of the globe right here. Won’t you
write me right away as soon as you read this and tell me you don’t
think I’ve tried to force anything, and anyhow no matter what
you think you forgive me and haven’t changed toward me, dear?</span></p>

</div>

<div><h1>CHAPTER VIII</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="dropcap">B</span>UT Lena did not respond right away. Instead,
she allowed a fortnight to elapse,
during which her state of mind was one of
indecision and her continuous emotion a sharp irritation;
both of these symptoms being manifest in
an interview she had with her brother George, one
day, when she finally decided to consult him. “It’s
so indecently unfair!” she complained. “It <span class="it">is</span> forcing
me; and his letter was a perfectly abject confession
of it. He admits himself he’s compelling
me to go out to that awful place and live with
him.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“How do you know it’s awful?” George inquired
mildly. “He’s the most likable chap I ever knew,
and <span class="it">he</span> comes from there. Doesn’t that look as
if——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, it doesn’t. Just think of being compelled
to listen to everybody speaking with that awful
Western accent! I can stand it in him because I
like his voice, and he’s only one; but imagine hearing
nothing <span class="it">else</span>!” Lena shivered, flinging out her beautiful
little hands in a despairing gesture, illuminated
by tiny stars of fire from her rings. “Just imagine
having hundreds of ’em talking about ‘wat<span class="it">urr</span>’ and
‘butt<span class="it">urr</span>’ all day long!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, I dare say they speak of other matters at
intervals,” George said. “If that’s the supremest
agony you have to face, Lena, I don’t see why you’re
kicking up such a row with yourself. I’d rather like
to go out there, myself.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What in the world for?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, for one reason,” he answered seriously,
“because I like Dan, but principally because I’d
do well to get away from New York.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“To live?” she cried incredulously. “I could
understand that, if you meant you’d like to get
away in order to live in Paris, but to want to go out
and bury yourself in one of those awful Western——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Paris!” George exclaimed. “For me? I suppose
your idea is a short life but a merry one!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why not? It might be better than living to a
hundred on ‘watt<span class="it">urr</span>’ and ‘butt<span class="it">urr</span>!’ What’s the
matter with you and New York?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Nothing’s the matter with New York except that
it’s got so many sides it can be whatever one chooses
to make it, so that a weak character like me gets
too many chances to increase his weaknesses here.
There’s no question about it, Lena; I’m a weak character.
I’ve proved it to myself too many times to
doubt it. A smaller city is pretty much one thing,
but New York is anything because it’s everything.
The trouble is with me I’ve slid into making a New
York for myself that I can’t break away from unless
I emigrate. My New York is Uncle Nick’s offices
for as few hours a day as I can fool ’em with; and after
that it’s three clubs and the Waldorf, the Holland
House, Martin’s, Jack’s, two or three roulette holes,
incidental bars, and sometimes the stage door of the
Casino. The rest of the time I live in a hansom cab.
A pretty thing, isn’t it!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Then why don’t you change it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Because I can’t. I can’t get myself away from
the crowd I’ve picked up, and that’s the life they
lead. Funny, too, I don’t really like one of ’em, yet
I can’t keep away from ’em because I’m in the same
ruts and talk the same lingo and drink the same
drinks. That’s the real trouble, I suppose, and
there’s a certain future ahead of me—a pleasant one
to look forward to!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What is?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Drunken stockbroker,” George replied with laconic
despondency. “That’s me, if I live to forty.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’d rather be one than buried in a mudhole on
the prairie,” said Lena. “I’d rather be anything
than that; yet it’s precisely what my thoughtful
fiancé informs me I have no choice about. I think
perhaps he’ll <span class="it">learn</span> whether I have or not, though!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Better think it over,” George advised, with a
thoughtful glance at his sister’s flushed and petulant
face. “It might be the best thing for you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It might,” he insisted. “You’ve made a pretty
quick-stepping New York of your own, Lena. Tea
at Sherry’s means mighty little tea for you, my dear.
A man told me the other day he’d never met a human
being who could survive as many Benedictines in
the afternoon as you can. Besides that, you get too
much music.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You’re crazy!” Lena cried. “I <span class="it">live</span> on music!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, you don’t,” he said. “You keep yourself
woozy with it. You go on music debauches, Lena.
You don’t take it as an art; you take it as an excitement.
You keep your emotions frothing with it,
and that’s why you can’t get along without it.
If you hadn’t been in the habit of getting yourself
woozy with music, that Venable affair would never
have happened.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“George!” she said sharply, and her eyes, already
angry, grew more brilliant with increased emotion.
“Shame on you!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, well——” he said placatively.</p>

<p class="pindent">“It’s a thing you have no right to make me remember.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Other people remember it,” he said, with a
brother’s grimness. “You needn’t think because
nobody outside the family ever speaks of it to you
it isn’t thought of and referred to when you’re
spoken <span class="it">of</span>.”</p>

<p class="pindent">She looked pathetic at this, and reproached him in
a broken voice. “Unmanly! One would think my
own—my own brother——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Your own brother is about the only person that
<span class="it">could</span> speak of it to you in a friendly way, Lena.
You know how the rest of the family speak of it to
you—when they do.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It’s so unfair!” she moaned. “Nobody ever
understood——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“We needn’t to go into that,” George said gently.
“I think myself it was your musical emotions on top
of a constitutional lack of discretion. Oh, I don’t
blame you! I’ve spent too much time trying to
cover my own indiscretions from the family. I’m
really more the family black sheep than you are,
only you had worse luck; that’s all. I only mention
it to get you to think a little before you talk of throwing
Dan Oliphant over rather than to go and live in
the town he’s so proud of.”</p>

<p class="pindent">She wiped her eyes, choked a little, and protested
feebly: “But the two things haven’t any connection.
What—what’s Venable got to do with——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, you make me say it,” George remarked as
she paused. “I think you understand as well as I
do; but if you want me to be definite, I will.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Not <span class="it">too</span> definite, please, George!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“How can I be anything else? There isn’t any
tactful way to say some things, Lena. You may get
proposals from some of these men you meet at parties
and father don’t know about——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Never mind, please, George. Do you have to
be quite so——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes,” he said decisively. “Quite. The family
have made it clear what they’ll do, if you ever try
again to marry one of the wrong sort, like Venable.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“ ‘The wrong sort!’ ” she echoed pathetically,
though with some bitterness toward her brother.
“He was the most interesting man I ever knew, and
a great artist. He was——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Unfortunate in his domestic experiences,” George
interrupted, concluding the sentence for her dryly.
“And you were unfortunate in overlooking—well, to
put it tactlessly, in seeming to have no objection to
what I’m afraid I must call his somewhat bigamous
tendencies, Lena.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“George!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“My dear, I’m trying to say something helpful.
Eligibles of our own walk in life enjoy dancing with
you or buying Benedictines for you, but after Venable,
none of ’em would be likely to——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“That’s enough, please, George!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No,” he said, “I’m explaining that Dan’s the
best thing in sight. The family weren’t too pleased
about him, I admit; but they couldn’t help seeing
that. For my part, I think it might be the making
of you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t care to be made, thanks.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I mean you might have a chance to improve,
living somewhere else,” he explained calmly. “But
more than that, Dan Oliphant looks up to you so
worshipfully—he pictures you as such spotless perfection—it
seems to me you’d just have to live up to
his idea of you. If you want to know the truth, I
took such a fancy to him I wasn’t too delighted on his
account when I saw he was getting serious about you;
but when he seemed to be so much so, I thought
maybe it might turn out pretty well for both of you.
It’s good sometimes for a man to have such ideals,
and it’s always good for a woman to live up to ’em.
Besides, you do care about him, don’t you?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes,” she said. “I wouldn’t have said I’d marry
him if I didn’t. I really did fall a lot in love with
him, but that’s not being in love with spending my
life in some terrible <span class="it">place</span>, is it? And besides I’m
not going to live up to his ideals; nothing bores me
more than pretending to be somebody I’m not. I
get enough of that with the family, thanks!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You think you won’t try to be the girl he believes
you are?” George asked gravely.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Don’t be silly! Why on earth should I pretend
to be anybody but myself?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“In that case,” George said, “I hope you’ll write
poor Dan that you refuse to be compelled and have
decided to break your engagement. He’ll be pretty
sick over it, I’m afraid, but I think you’d both live
happier—and longer!”</p>

<p class="pindent">With this brotherly tribute, spoken in a rueful
humour, he departed, leaving her at her small French
desk, where the sheet of blue-tinted note paper before
her remained blank, except for a few teardrops. In
spite of his parting advice, George had relieved
neither her indecision nor her conviction that she was
being ill-treated by her lover. Nevertheless, except
for one thing, she was inclined to accept that advice.</p>

<p class="pindent">The one deterrent was the group of people defined
by George and herself, in tones never enthusiastic, as
“the family.” Aunts, uncles, and cousins were included,
all of them persons of weight, and some of
them of such prodigious substance in wealth as to
figure as personages in the metropolis; though all
McMillans were personages to themselves, on the
score of what they believed to be clan greatness due
to historical descent and hereditary merit. To their
view, New York was a conglomerate background for
the McMillans and a not extensive additional gentry,
principally English and Dutch in origin. Beyond
the conglomerate background, the McMillans permitted
themselves to be aware of certain foreigners
as gentry, and also of some flavourings of gentry,
similar to their own, in Philadelphia, Boston,
and one or two smaller cities, but there perfected
civilization ended. All else they believed to be
a kind of climbing barbarism, able to show forth
talent or power, perhaps, in a spasmodic way, or
even isolated greatness, as in Abraham Lincoln, but
never gentry, except in imitations laughably pinchbeck.</p>

<p class="pindent">To the McMillan view, Lena’s adventure with that
dashing sculpture, half genius and half Grecian-shaped
meat, Perry Venable, had placed her gentryship
in jeopardy, damaged her as a McMillan;—in
fact, her infatuation for so conspicuous a baritone
could not avoid being itself conspicuous; it “made
talk,” and in answer to the talk she had announced
her engagement to him. Then, in the face of the
family’s formidable opposition, she made preparations
for a clandestine wedding, which Mr. Venable
was unable to attend on account of his wife’s arrival
from Poland. Thereupon, standing alone against
the shock of heavy McMillan explosives, Lena’s impulsive
loyalty in defending the godlike baritone led
her to make an unfortunate statement: great artists
were not to be bound by the ordinary fetters upon
conduct, she said;—and this prelude not being accepted
as of any great force and originality, she followed
it hotly with the declaration that she had long
been aware of the Polish lady’s existence.</p>

<p class="pindent">It was in great part to this admission of hers that
the unwitting Dan Oliphant owed the family’s consent
to his suit for the hand of a McMillan. A
McMillan who got herself talked about, and then
confessed, not in the manner of confession but with
anger, that she had not been deceived—such a
McMillan would conceivably do such a thing again,
and a respectable barbarian bridegroom might be
the best substitute for those unfortunately obsolete
family resources in times of youthful revolt, <span class="it">lettres
de cachet</span> and the enforced taking of veils. But, in
good truth, Dan may have owed to Lena’s celebrated
admission more than the family’s consent, for the
family’s austerity of manner toward Lena became
so protracted an oppression that she was the readier
to be pleased with anything as cheerfully different
from that family as Dan was.</p>

<p class="pindent">Without doubt, too, he owed it to this McMillan
austerity that she did not write to him now and break
her engagement with him. The Venable affair was
two years past, but the austerity went on, unabated.
Dan was at least an avenue of escape, and, as Lena
had said to her brother, she was “a lot in love” with
him. Yet she hesitated, angry with him because he
could not offer what she wanted, and half convinced
that escape from what she hated might be an escape
into what she would hate more. So she wrote to
him finally:</p>

<div class="blockquote100percent">

<p class="pindent"><span style="font-size:smaller">You said you loved me! That isn’t quite easy to believe just
now. Why did you let me go on counting upon our having a
year abroad? I’m afraid I’ll never be able to understand it. I
don’t know what to say or what to do. I think the best thing
you could do would be to come East at once. Maybe I could
understand better if we talked it over together. It seems to me
that you couldn’t have cared for me with any depth or you
wouldn’t have allowed things to be as you say they are. A man
can always do anything he really wants to, and if you had <span class="it">really</span>
wanted—oh, I know it’s futile to be writing of <span class="it">that</span>! You simply
didn’t care enough, and I thought you did! The only thing for
you to do is to come at once. We must settle what’s to be done,
because I can’t go on in the state of unhappiness I’ve suffered
since your last letter. Maybe you can convince me that you do
care a little in spite of having forced me to give up what I counted
on. If you do convince me, I suppose there’s no use putting off
things—I don’t want a large, fussy wedding. If we <span class="it">are</span> going
ahead with it, we might as well get it over. I don’t know what to
do, I admit that; but I’m still</span></p>

<p class="line" style="text-align:right;margin-right:2em;"><span style="font-size:smaller"><span class="it">Your</span> half-heartbroken</span></p>

<p class="line" style="text-align:right;margin-right:2em;"><span style="font-size:smaller"><span class="sc">Lena</span>.</span></p>

</div>

<div><h1>CHAPTER IX</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="dropcap">N</span>OT long ago there was found everywhere in
the Midland country a kind of wood then
most characteristic of it but now almost
disappeared, a vanishment not inexpressive of nature’s
way of striking chords; for the wood is no
longer so like the Midlands as it was. But in the days
when Ornaby Addition struggled in embryo, hickory
still grew in profusion, and that tough and seasoned
old sample of it, Mr. Shelby, withstood at his office
desk the hottest summer in several years. He permitted
himself the alleviation of a palm-leaf fan, and
when his open carriage came for him at a little before
six o’clock, every afternoon, he had the elderly negro
coachman drive him out to the end of the cedar-block
pavement of Amberson Boulevard before going home;
but on the day that began the hottest hot spell of the
summer he forebore to indulge himself with this excursion,
albeit he forebore somewhat peevishly.</p>

<p class="pindent">“We got to go straight home this evening, Jim,”
he said, and added, “Plague take it!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, suh,” the coachman assented. “She lay it
down she want me ca’y you home quick as I kin git
you. I tell ’er bettuh not be <span class="it">too</span> quick or I’m goin’
have me two nice dead trottin’ hosses. Hoss die
same as a man, day like this, an’ it ain’t cool off airy
bit sense noon. Look to me like gittin’ hottuh, ’stid
o’ simmerin’ down some, way ought to!” He widened
one fat brown cheek in a slight distortion,
producing a sound not vocal, but correctly interpreted
by the horses as the call for an advance. Then, as
they obediently set off at a trot, he chuckled; for although
he complained of the heat he really liked it;
and was not ill-equipped for it in shapeless linen, a
straw hat, and slippers. “Tell me be’n five six
whi’ men drop down dade right out in a middle the
sidewalk to-day,” he said. “Way it keepin’ up,
they be mo’ of ’em befo’ mawnin’. Look at them
hosses bustin’ out an’ lathun theyse’f a’ready, an’
I ain’t trot ’em a full square yit!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You needn’t push ’em on my account,” Mr.
Shelby said, “<span class="it">I</span>’m not in any hurry.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, suh,” the coloured man agreed, smiling over
some private thought of his own. “I guess you ain’t!
But she said, hot or no hot, git you home early’s I
could fix it.” And then he laughed outright.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Plague take it!” Mr. Shelby said again; for what
amused the coachman made the master all the more
peevish. Unquestionably, he was a deeply annoyed
old gentleman, in spite of the fact that he was the
coolest looking human being up and down the full
length of National Avenue, into which thoroughfare
the carriage had turned.</p>

<p class="pindent">The long avenue might well have been mistaken
for a colony of invalids and listless convalescents.
Damp and languid citizens, their coats over bared
forearms, made their painful way homeward from
downtown, mopping fiery brows and throats; other
coatless citizens, arrived at home, reclined melting in
wicker rocking-chairs upon their verandas or lawns,
likewise mopping as they melted; while beside
them their wives and daughters, in flimsiest white,
sat fanning plaintively. Here and there the stout
father of a family stood near his front fence and
played a weak and tepid stream from the garden
hose over his lawn, or sprinkled the street, while his
children, too hot to be importunate, begged lifelessly
to relieve him of the task. The leaves of the massed
foliage that made the street a green tunnel hung
flaccidly gilding in the sun; and the sun abated not
at all as it approached its setting. The air drooped
upon the people with a weight too heavy to let them
move readily, yet for breathing there seemed to be
no air; and it had no motion, so that the transparent
bits of paper, where the popcorn man or the hokey-pokey
man had passed, lay in the street and on the
sidewalks as still as so much lead.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Seem like ev’thing wilted down flat,” Mr. Shelby’s
fat coachman remarked as they turned into the
driveway at home. “Me, I reckon if you’s to take
little slim string o’ cobweb up on the roof an’ push
’er off, she’d fall ri’ down on the groun’ same as
a flatiron. Look fountain, Mist’ Shelby!” He
laughed happily, and waved his whip toward the
bronze swan. “That duck, let alone he ain’t got
stren’f ’nough to spout, he ain’t but jes’ hodly able
to goggle his th’oat little bit.”</p>

<p class="pindent">The swan was indeed put to it to eject a faint spray,
for all over the town the people were making such
demands on the water, already low with the dry season,
that the depleted river whence it came threatened
to disappear unless the drought were broken.
However, neither drought nor heat had to do with
Mr. Shelby’s peevishness, which visibly increased
when the carriage turned into his driveway;—what
made him frown so bitterly was the sight of his
daughter, charmingly dressed in fabrics of gossamer
weight, her shapely hands gloved in spite of the
weather, and her hazel eyes bright under a hat of
ivory lace. She was sitting upon a wicker bench on
the big veranda, but when the lathered bay horses
trotted through the driveway gate, she jumped up
and hurried to meet her father as he stepped out
upon a stone horseblock near the veranda steps.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Papa!” she cried, “you must hurry; we’re terribly
late! I wouldn’t have waited for you, but I
was afraid you wouldn’t go unless I took you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I wouldn’t,” he said grimly. “You bet your
sweet life I wouldn’t!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“<span class="it">Won’t</span> you hurry?” she urged.</p>

<p class="pindent">“What for? Ain’t I dressed up enough? All
I’m goin’ to do is wash my hands.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Then do,” she cried, as he moved to go indoors.
“<span class="it">Please</span> hurry!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Never you mind,” he returned crossly. “I don’t
usually take more’n half a jiffy to just wash my
hands, thank you!” And as he disappeared he was
heard to mutter, not without vehemence: “Plague
take it!”</p>

<p class="pindent">A few moments later he reappeared, not visibly
altered except that his irritated expression had become
one of revolt. “Look a-here!” he said. “I
don’t see as <span class="it">I</span>’m called upon to promenade over
there and join in with all this high jinks and
goin’s-on!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Papa——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t mind an old-fashioned party,” he went
on. “I used to go to plenty of ’em in my time, but
when all they got for you to do is listen to half the
women in town tryin’ to out-holler each other, why,
you bet your bottom dollar I’m through!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But, papa——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, sir-ree!” he protested loudly. “You can
well as not go on over there without me. Why,
just look at the crowd they got in there already.”</p>

<p class="pindent">He waved his hand to the neighbouring domain on
the south, where the crowd he bitterly mentioned was
not in sight, but was indicated by external manifestations.
Open family carriages, surreys, runabouts,
phaetons, and “station wagons” filled the Oliphants’
driveway, and, for a hundred yards or more, were
drawn up to the curb on each side of the avenue.
Coloured drivers sat at leisure, gossiping from one
vehicle to another, or shouting over jokes about the
hot weather. The horses drooped, or, with heads
tossing at intervals, protested against their check-reins—and
one of them, detained in position by a
strap fastened to a portable iron weight, alternately
backed and advanced with such persistence that he
now and then produced enough commotion to bring
profane bellows of reproof from the drivers, after
which he would subside momentarily, then misbehave
again.</p>

<p class="pindent">One of the coachmen decided to settle the matter,
and, sliding to the ground from the hot leather front
cushion of a “two-horse surrey”, went to chide the
nervous animal. “Look a-me, hoss!” the man
shouted fiercely. “You gone spoil ev’ybody’s pleasure.
Whyn’t you behave youse’f an’ listen to
music?” He pointed eloquently to the Oliphants’
open windows, whence came the sound of violins, a
harp and a flute. “You git a chance listen nice music
when you stan’ all day in you’ stall, hoss? An’
look at all them dressed-up white folks goin’ junketin’.
What they goin’ think about you, you keep
on ackin’ a fool?” Here, to clarify his meaning to the
disturber, he gestured toward some young people—girls
in pretty summer flimsies and young men in
white flannels—who were going in through the iron
gateway. “You think anybody goin’ respect you,
cuttin’ up that fool way? You look out, hoss, you
look out! You back into my surrey ag’in I’m goin’
take an’ smack you so’s you won’t fergit it long’s
you live!”</p>

<p class="pindent">Mr. Shelby, becoming more obdurate on his veranda,
found this altercation helpful to his argument.
“Why, just listen! That crowd’s makin’ so much
noise I’d lose my hearin’ if I went in there. I won’t
do it!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But, papa,” his daughter pleaded, “it isn’t the
people in the house who are making the noise; it’s
that darkey yelling at a horse. You’ve <span class="it">got</span> to come.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why have I?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Because you’re their next-door <span class="it">neighbour</span>. Because
it’s a time when <span class="it">all</span> their friends should go.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why is it?” he asked stubbornly. “What they
want to make all this fuss over her for, anyway?
I guess, from what I hear, her folks didn’t make any
fuss over <span class="it">them</span> in New York. Just barely let ’em
come to the weddin’ and never even asked ’em to a
single meal! I should think the Oliphant family’d
have too much pride to go and get up a big doin’s like
this over a girl when her family treated them like
that!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“<span class="it">Please</span> come,” Martha begged. “All that matters
to Dan’s father and mother is that he <span class="it">is</span> married
and they want their old friends to meet the bride and
say a word of welcome to her.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, <span class="it">I</span> don’t want to say any welcome to her.
Dan Oliphant hadn’t got any more business to get
married right now than a muskrat; he’s as poor as
one! I don’t want to go over there and take on like
I approve of any such a foolishness.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You’re only making excuses,” Martha said,
frowning, and she took his arm firmly, propelling
him toward the veranda steps. “You know how
they’d all feel if their oldest neighbour didn’t go.
You <span class="it">are</span> going, papa.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I won’t!” he protested fiercely; then unexpectedly
giving way to what at least appeared to be
superior physical force, he descended the steps.
“Plague take it!” he said, and walked on beside his
daughter without further resistance.</p>

<p class="pindent">At the Oliphants’ open front doors they seemed to
step into the breath of a furnace stoked with flowers.
Moreover, this hot and fragrant breath was laden
with clamour, the conglomerate voices of two hundred
people exhausting themselves to be heard in
spite of one another and in spite of the music.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Gee-mun-<span class="it">nently</span>!” Mr. Shelby groaned, as this
turmoil buffeted his ears. “Why, this is worse’n a
chicken farm when they’re killin’ for market! I’m
goin’ straight home!” And he made a serious attempt
to depart through the portal they had just
entered, but Martha had taken his arm too firmly
for him to succeed without creating scandal.</p>

<p class="pindent">A head taller than her father, she was both powerful
and determined; and his resistance could be but
momentary. She said “<span class="it">Papa</span>!” indignantly under
her breath; he succumbed, indistinctly muttering obsolete
profanity; and they went into a drawing-room
that was the very pit of the clamour and the flowery
heat, in spite of generous floor space and high ceilings.
The big room was so crowded with hot, well-dressed
people that Martha had difficulty in passing between
the vociferous groups, especially as many sought to
detain her with greetings, and women clutched her,
demanding in confidential shouts: “What do you
<span class="it">think</span> of her?”</p>

<p class="pindent">But she pressed on, keeping a sure hold upon her
outraged father, until they reached the other end
of the room; for there, in a trellised floral bower,
with all the flowers wilted in the heat, Dan Oliphant
stood with his bride and his father and mother.</p>

<p class="pindent">The reception party appeared to be little less wilted
than the flowers; Mr. Oliphant and Dan, in their
thick frock coats, suffering more than the two ladies;
but all four smiled with a brave fixity, as they had
been smiling for more than an hour; and the three
Oliphants were still able to speak with a cordiality
that even this ordeal had been unable to exhaust.</p>

<p class="pindent">The bride might have been taken for a somewhat
bewildered automaton, greatly needing a rewinding
of its mechanism. In white satin, with pearls in
her black hair, she was waxy pale under the rouge it
was her habit to use, and she only murmured indistinguishably
as Mr. Oliphant presented his guests
to her. The faint smile she wore upon her lips she
did indeed appear to wear, and to have worn so long
that it was almost worn-out;—no one could doubt
that she longed for the time when she could permit
herself to get rid of it. As a matter of fact, she
granted herself that privilege when Mr. Oliphant
presented Miss Shelby to her; for the smile faded to
an indiscernible tracing as Lena found the statuesque
amplitude of Martha towering over her. The
small bride looked almost apprehensive.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I hope—I do hope you’ll be able to like me,”
Martha said, a little nervously. “I live next door,
and I hope—I do hope you’ll be able to.” Then,
as Lena said nothing, Martha gave Mr. Shelby’s arm
a tug, unseen, and brought him unwillingly to face
the bride. “This is my father. He’s a new neighbour
for you, too.”</p>

<p class="pindent">The old gentleman made a slight, hostile duck with
his head. “Pleased to meet ye, ma’am,” he said
severely.</p>

<p class="pindent">At that the bride seemed to be astonished.
“What?” she said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I bid you good afternoon, ma’am,” he returned,
ducked his head again, and passed on as rapidly as
he could.</p>

<p class="pindent">Martha whispered hurriedly to Dan: “She <span class="it">is</span>
beautiful!” and would have followed her father, but
Dan detained her.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Martha, will you help us to get her to like
it here?” he said. “You see she’s such an utter
stranger and everything’s bound to seem sort of different
at first. I’ve been hoping you’d let her be
your best friend, because you—you’d——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“If she’ll let me, Dan,” Martha said, her voice
faltering as she continued, “You know that I’d always—I’d
always <span class="it">want</span> to——” She stopped,
glancing back at Lena, whose own glances seemed to
be noting with some interest the heartiness with
which Dan still grasped the hand of this next-door
Juno. “I know she’s lovely!” Martha said; and
she moved away to overtake her father, who had
every intention of leaving the house at once, but
found himself again balked by his daughter’s taking
his arm.</p>

<p class="pindent">“What <span class="it">you</span> so upset over?” he asked crossly.
“What’s the matter your face?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Nothing, papa. Why?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Looks as though you’re takin’ cold. It’s the
heat, maybe. Let’s go.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Not yet, papa.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Look a-here!” he said, “I’m not goin’ to promenade
out in that dining-room and ruin my stomach
on lemonade and doodaddle refreshments. It’s suppertime
right now, and I want to go home!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Hush!” she bade him. “It wouldn’t be polite
to rush right out. Just stay a minute or two longer;
then you can go.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But what’s the <span class="it">use</span>? I don’t want to hang
around here with all the fat women in town perspiring
against my clo’es. I hate the whole possytucky
of ’em!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“<span class="it">Sh</span>, papa!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t care,” he went on with husky vehemence.
“Nothin’ to do here except stare at the bride, and
she’s so little it don’t take much time to see <span class="it">her</span>;
she’s just about half your size—you made her seem
like a wax doll beside you, and the way she looked at
you, I guess she thought so, too. Anyway, she does
look like a wax doll. Looks worse’n <span class="it">that</span>, too!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, no!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, she does,” he insisted. “She’s got paint on
her. Her face is all over paint.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It isn’t paint. It’s only rouge.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What’s the difference? It ain’t decent. She
paints. She’s got red paint on her cheeks and black
paint on her eye-winkers. Looks to me like Dan
Oliphant’s gone and married a New York fast
woman.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Hush!” Martha commanded him sharply.
“People will hear you!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I can’t hardly hear myself!” he retorted. “Never
got in such a gibblety-gabble in my born days. I
tell you she paints! Her mother-in-law ought to
take her out to a washstand and clean her up like a
respectable woman. The Oliphant family ought to
know what people’ll take her for, if they let her go
around all painted up like that. If she was <span class="it">my</span>
daughter-in-law——”</p>

<p class="pindent">But here Martha’s protest was so vehement as to
check him. “Everybody <span class="it">will</span> hear you! Be quiet!
Look there!”</p>

<p class="pindent">She caught her breath, staring wide-eyed; and,
turning to see what had so decisively fixed her attention,
he realized that the clamorous place had become
almost silent. Old Mrs. Savage, leaning upon her
grandson Harlan’s arm, had entered the room and
was on her way to the bride.</p>

<p class="pindent">The guests made a passage for her, crowding back
upon themselves until there was an aisle through
which she and Harlan slowly passed. She was in
fine gray silk and lace; and her hair, covered only
in part by the lace cap, was still browner than it
was white. But she could no longer hold herself upright
as of yore; a cruel stoop had got into the indomitable
back at last, and she was visibly tremulous
all over. The emaciation, too, of such great age had
come upon her; the last few months had begun the
final shrivelling of everything except the self, but in
her eyes that ageless self almost flamed;—it had a
kind of majesty, for its will alone and no other force
could have made the spent body walk. Thus,
among these people who had known her all their
lives, there was an awe of her, so that they had
hushed themselves, silently making room for her to
pass; and she was so frail, so nearly gone from life,
that to many of them it seemed almost as if a woman
already dead walked among them. They perceived
that she could never again do what she was doing
to-day, nor could any fail to comprehend in her look
her own gaunt recognition that this was the last time
she would thus be seen.</p>

<p class="pindent">Slowly, with Harlan helping her, she went through
the room, came to Lena, and stood before her, looking
at her and making little sighing murmurs that
told of the effort it cost her still to live and move.
Then, in a voice not cracked or quavering, though
broken a little, she said: “I thought so! But you’re
welcome.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Lena looked frightened, but Dan laughed and kissed
his grandmother’s cheek, talking cheerfully. “Well,
this <span class="it">is</span> an honour, grandma! We hardly hoped you’d
come out in all this heat. We certainly appreciate
it, grandma, and we’ll never forget you thought
enough of us to do it. It’s just the best thing could
happen to us in the world!”</p>

<p class="pindent">His free and easy full voice released the guests
from the sympathetic hush put upon them by the
apparition; they turned to one another again and
the interrupted chatter was loudly resumed; but
Mrs. Savage extended her right arm and with her
gloved hand abruptly touched the bride’s cheek.</p>

<p class="pindent">Startled, Lena uttered a faint outcry, protesting.
“What—why, what do you mean?”</p>

<p class="pindent">Mrs. Savage was looking fiercely at the tremulous
fingertips of the white glove that had touched the
rouged cheek.</p>

<p class="pindent">“<span class="it">She’s painted!</span>”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan laughed and patted the old lady’s shoulder.
“You’d better go and get some iced coffee, grandma,”
he said, and turned to his mother. “Couldn’t we
all go and get something cold now with grandma?
I don’t believe there are any more people coming
and Lena’s pretty tired, I’m afraid.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I am,” Lena said. “I really am.” She came
close to him, pleading in a faint voice: “For heaven’s
sake let me go up to my room and lie down. I can’t
stand any more!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, Lena——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Please let me go, Dan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why—but——” he began. “Couldn’t you stick
out just a little longer? If we go to the dining-room
with grandma I think it might please her. Besides,
if the bride disappeared at her own reception I’m
afraid they might think——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“<span class="it">Please</span>, Dan!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well—but, dear——”</p>

<p class="pindent">But Lena waited for no more argument; she made
a gesture of most poignant appeal, slipped by him
and went quickly out through a door that led into a
rear hallway. Dan’s impulse was to follow her, but
he decided that his first duty led him in another direction,
and joined his grandmother who was on her
way to the dining-room. When he had helped Harlan
to bring the old lady iced coffee and such accompaniments
as she would consent to nibble, it was
time to return to the drawing-room to say farewell
to the guests; for, according to a prevalent custom,
they could not depart without assuring him that they
had enjoyed themselves.</p>

<p class="pindent">He explained to them that the heat had been too
much for Lena, received their messages of sympathy
for her and their renewed congratulations for himself,
and finally, when they were all gone, ran anxiously
upstairs to her. He found her lying face
downward upon her bed in her bridal gown, an attitude
less of exhaustion than of agitation, though it
spoke of both. Both were manifest, too, in the disorder
of her curled black hair and in the way one of
her delicate arms was stretched upward across the
pillow with a damp handkerchief half clenched in
the childlike fingers.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, Lena——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You’d better let me alone!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But what is the matter?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Nothing!”</p>

<p class="pindent">He touched the small hand on the pillow solicitously.
“I’m afraid I let you get tired, dear.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“ ‘Tired!’ ” she echoed, withdrawing her hand instantly.
“ ‘<span class="it">Tired!</span>’ ” And with that she abruptly
sat upright upon the bed, showing him a face misshapen
with emotion. What added to the disastrous
effect upon her young husband was that her movement
completed the disorder of her hair so that some
heavy strands of it hung down, with the string of
pearls, still enmeshed, dangling unheeded against
her cheek. The picture she thus presented was almost
unnerving to Dan, who had never seen a
woman so greatly discomposed. His mother had wept
heartbrokenly when her father died; but she had
kept her face covered; and he had no recollection of
ever seeing her with her hair in disorder.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, Lena!” he cried. “What on earth——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Nothing!” she said, and laughed painfully, satirizing
the word. “Nothing! Nothing at all!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But, dear——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Never mind!” She shivered, then sighed profoundly,
and stared at him with curiosity, as if she
were examining something unfamiliar. “So this is
what it’s going to be like, is it?” she asked.</p>

<p class="pindent">“What?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I mean this <span class="it">place!</span> These <span class="it">people!</span> This—this
<span class="it">climate!</span>”</p>

<p class="pindent">But here Dan was touched upon his native pride.
“Climate? Why, this is the best climate in the
world, Lena! There isn’t any climate to compare
with it! And as for this little warm spell just now,
why, you see we do need <span class="it">some</span> hot weather.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Like <span class="it">this</span>?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, certainly! You see this is the greatest corn
belt in the country, dear. If it wasn’t for a stretch
or two of good corn-growin’ weather like this every
summer, the farmers wouldn’t get half a crop, and
there’d be a big drop in prosperity.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“And you’d <span class="it">rather</span> have it hot like this, then?”
Lena asked, seeming to find him increasingly strange.
“You want the farmers to grow their corn, no
matter what happens to your wife?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But, my goodness!” he cried, in his perplexity.
“<span class="it">I</span> don’t run the weather, Lena! It don’t make any
difference how I might want it, the weather just <span class="it">is</span>
the way it is. Besides, we don’t mind it so much.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Don’t you?” She laughed briefly, and shook
her head as though marvelling at the plight in which
she found herself, wondering how she had come to it.
“No, I suppose you were born and brought up to
such weather. I suppose that’s why you didn’t tell
me about it before I came here. You probably
didn’t realize what this deathly suffocating air might
do to the nerves of a human being who’s always lived
near the sea. And for your mother to make me
stand hours in that oven, trying to talk to all those
awful <span class="it">people</span>——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Lena!” Dan was as profoundly astonished as
he was distressed. “Why, those are the best people
in town; they’re our old family friends, and I don’t
know where in the world you’d expect to find better.
What fault could you find with ’em, dear? They
were all so cordial and pleasant, and so anxious to be
friends with you, I thought you’d enjoy——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, yes!” she cried. “ ‘Enjoy!’ Oh, yes!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What’s the matter with ’em? Weren’t their
clothes——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Their clothes!” she echoed desperately. “What
do I care about their clothes!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Then what——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, don’t!” she moaned. “Don’t ask me what’s
wrong with such people!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But I do ask you, Lena.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Don’t! My life wouldn’t be long enough to tell
you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, I declare!” the dismayed young husband
exclaimed, and sat down beside her on the bed.</p>

<p class="pindent">But she leaned away from him as he would have
put his arm about her. “Please don’t try petting
me,” she said. “You’ll never be able to make me
stand such people. I couldn’t! It isn’t <span class="it">in</span> me to!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“This is just a little spell you’ve got, Lena; it
won’t last. In a few days you’ll begin to feel mighty
different, and then when you get to knowing mother
a little better, and some of the younger people, like
Martha Shelby——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Who’s Martha Shelby?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You met her and her father this afternoon,” Dan
explained. “Harlan and I grew up with her, and
she’s one of the finest girls in the world. She’s always
just the same—cheerful, you know, and dependable,
no matter what happens. You’ll get
mighty fond of her, Lena. Everybody always does.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Was she that great hulking thing with the
dried-up little old father that said, ‘Pleased to meet
ye, ma’am?’ ”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan laughed uneasily. “Why, Martha isn’t
‘hulking.’ She’s a mighty fine-lookin’ girl! She’s
tall, but she isn’t as tall as I am, and she’s——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“She <span class="it">is</span> that big girl, then,” Lena said with conviction.
“I <span class="it">hope</span> you don’t intend to ask me to see
anything of <span class="it">her</span>!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But, Lena——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“She’s an <span class="it">awful</span> person!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But you’ve just barely met her,” he cried, his
distress and perplexity increasing. “You don’t
know——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“She was perfectly awful,” Lena insisted sharply.
“Do you <span class="it">have</span> to let her call you ‘Dan?’ ”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, good gracious, everybody in town calls me
‘Dan,’ and Martha lives next door.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t see why you need to be intimate with
people merely because they live next door,” Lena
said coldly. “I suppose, though, in this heavenly
climate you feel because a girl lives next door to
you it’s necessary to let her hold your hand quite a
little!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But she didn’t hold my hand.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Didn’t she? It seemed to me I noticed——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, no, no!” he exclaimed. “I only wanted to
stop her a minute to say I hoped she’d help make you
like it here and be as good a friend to you as she’s always
been to me.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I see. That’s why you held her hand.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But I didn’t——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Of course not!” Lena interrupted. “Not more
than five minutes or so! And <span class="it">she’s</span> the one you
especially want me to be friends with! I never saw
a more awful person.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But what’s ‘awful’ about her?”</p>

<p class="pindent">Lena shook her head, as if in despair of him for not
comprehending Martha’s awfulness. “She’s just
awful,” she said, implying that if he didn’t perceive
for himself why Martha was awful he hadn’t a mind
capable of being enlightened. “I suppose you expect
me to be intimate with her father, too?”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan laughed desperately. “I wouldn’t be apt to
ask you to be particularly intimate with anybody his
age, Lena.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I hope not,” she said, and became rigid, looking
at him with a cold hostility that was new to his experience
and almost appalled him. “I was afraid
you might intend to ask me to be intimate with your
grandmother.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan seemed to crumple; he groaned, grew red,
apologized unhappily: “Oh, Lord! I was <span class="it">afraid</span>
that’d upset you, but I kind of hoped you’d forget
it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“ ‘Forget it?’ When she did it before everybody!
Pawing me—croaking at me——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, Lord!” he groaned. “I was afraid it bothered
you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“ ‘<span class="it">Bothered</span>’ me! Is that your word for it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Nobody else noticed it, Lena,” he went on.
“Nobody except just our family——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, yes!” she said. “The next-door person
you admire so much was one of those that took it all
in. She was in at the death—<span class="it">my</span> death, thank you!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Lena, you don’t understand at all. Nobody
thinks anything about anything grandma does.
You see she’s a good deal what people call a ‘privileged
character.’ ”</p>

<p class="pindent">“ ‘Privileged?’ Yes! I should say she takes privileges
perhaps!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, dear me!” he sighed. “Lena, you just
mustn’t mind it. You see, she belongs to two
generations back, and besides I suppose most people
here wouldn’t know just what to make of your puttin’
artificial colour on your face. For that matter, your
own mother and sister used to be against it, even
in New York, and probably people would take notice
of it here a little more than they would there. I
kind of hoped myself, when you got here——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“How kind of you!” she said. “Possibly some
day you’ll understand a little of what I’ve had to go
through since you brought me to this place. Yesterday,
when we got here, I thought I just couldn’t <span class="it">live</span>
in such heat. You’re used to it; you don’t know
what it is to a person who’d never even imagined it.
And in spite of the fact that I was absolutely prostrate
with it, your mother informs me that she’s invited
people to come and shake my hand and arm
off for two hours in an oven. Then, because I’m so
deathly pale that I look ghastly, I use a little rouge
and am publicly insulted for it; after which my husband
reproves me for trying to look a little less like a
dead person.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan was miserable with remorse. “No, no, no!
<span class="it">I</span> don’t mind your puttin’ it on, Lena. I didn’t mean
to reprove you; I only——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You only meant to say your grandmother’s insult
was justified.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But it <span class="it">wasn’t</span> an insult, Lena. After you get to
know grandma better——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“After I <span class="it">what</span>?” Lena interrupted.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You’ll understand her better after you get to
know her.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“After I <span class="it">what</span>?” Lena said again.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I said——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Listen!” she interrupted fiercely. “You must
understand this. On absolutely no account must
you expect me ever to go into that frightful old
woman’s house, or to see her, or to speak to her, or
to allow her to speak to me. Never!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, Lord!” Dan groaned; then rose, rubbed his
damp forehead, crossed the room with a troubled
and lagging step, and, upon the sound of a bell-toned
gong below, turned again to his bride. “There’s
supper. Mother said we’d just have a light supper
this evening instead of dinner. Could you——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Could I what?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Could you wash your face and fix your hair up a
little?” he said hopefully, yet with a warranted nervousness.
“It’ll do you good to freshen up and eat
a little. Except the family there’ll be nobody there
except—except——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Except whom?” she demanded.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well—except Martha,” he faltered. “Mother
asked her yesterday because she thought you’d—well,
I mean except Martha and—and grandma.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Lena again threw herself face downward upon the
bed; and when he tried to comfort her she struck at
him feebly without lifting her head.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER X</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="dropcap">H</span>ALF an hour later he brought her a tray,
a dainty one prepared by his mother, and
set it upon a table close beside the bed.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Here you are, dearie,” he said gayly. “Jellied
chicken, cold as ice, and iced tea and ice-cold salad.
Not a thing hot except some nice crisp toast. You’ll
feel like running a foot-race after you eat it, Lena!”</p>

<p class="pindent">She spoke without moving, keeping her face away
from him. “Are those women still downstairs?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Who?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Your grandmother and that big girl—the awful
one.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You don’t mean——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I asked you if they’re still in the house.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“They’re just goin’ home, Lena. Martha told me
to tell you how sorry she is you feel the heat so badly.
Won’t you eat something now, please, dear?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, thank you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Please! You’ll feel all right again if you’ll eat
something, and to-morrow morning we’ll drive out to
Ornaby Addition. <span class="it">Then</span> you’ll feel like a <span class="it">queen</span>,
Lena; because it’s all yours and you’ll see what it’s
goin’ to do for us.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Do you think it will get us away from here?”
she asked in a dead voice.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, by that time,” Dan answered cheerfully,
“I expect maybe you won’t want to get away.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“ ‘By that time,’ ” she said, quoting him dismally.
“You mean it’s going to be a <span class="it">long</span> time?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Lena, I wish you’d just look at this tray. I know
if you’d only look at it, you couldn’t help eating.
You’d——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, hush!” she moaned, and struck her pillow a
futile blow. “Someone told me once that you people
out here always <span class="it">were</span> trying to get everybody to
eat, that you thought just eating would cure everything.
I suppose you and all your family have
been eating away, downstairs there, just the same as
ever. It makes me die to think of it! I’ve had delirium
in fevers, but I never was delirious enough to
imagine a place where there wasn’t <span class="it">some</span> mercy in
the heat! There isn’t any here; it’s almost dusk and
hotter than ever. I couldn’t any more eat than if
I were some poor thing cooking alive on a grill.
What on earth do you want me to <span class="it">eat</span> for?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, dearie,” he said placatively. “I think it
would strengthen you and make you feel so much
better, maybe you’d be willing to—to——” He
hesitated, faltering.</p>

<p class="pindent">“To what?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, you see grandma’s so terribly old—and
just these last few months she’s broken so—we know
we can’t hope to see much more of her, dear; and so
we make quite a little fuss over her when she’s able
to come here. I did hope maybe you’d feel able to
go down with me to tell her good-night.”</p>

<p class="pindent">At that, Lena struck the pillow again, and then
again and again; she beat it with a listless desperation.
“Didn’t you <span class="it">understand</span> what I said to you about
her?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, yes; but I know that was just a little nervousness,
Lena; you didn’t really mean it. I know
you feel differently about it already.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No!” she cried, interrupting him sharply. “No!
No!” And then, in her pain, her voice became so
passionately vehement that Dan was alarmed. “No!
No! <span class="it">No!</span>”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Lena! I’m afraid they’ll hear you downstairs.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What do <span class="it">I</span> care!” she cried so loudly that Martha
Shelby, in the twilight of the yard below, on her way
to the gate, paused and half turned; and Dan saw
her through the open window. “What do <span class="it">I</span> care!”
Lena screamed. “What do I <span class="it">care</span>!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, dear me!” he groaned, and though Martha
hurried on he was sure that she had heard.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t <span class="it">care</span>!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, dear me!” he groaned again, and went to
close the door which he had thoughtlessly left open
when he came into the room. But, to his dismay,
before he closed it he heard Mrs. Savage’s still sonorous
voice in the hall downstairs: “No, don’t bother
him. Harlan’s enough to get me home. But if <span class="it">I</span>
had a daughter-in-law with tantrums I’d mighty
soon cure her.”</p>

<p class="pindent">At that point Dan shut the door hurriedly, and
went back to the bedside. “Lena,” he said, in great
distress, “if you won’t eat anything, I just don’t see
what I can do!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You don’t?” she asked, and turned to look at
him. “It seems to me nothing could be simpler.
You know perfectly well what you can do.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Take me out of this. Keep your promise to me
and take me abroad.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But I <span class="it">can’t</span>, dearie,” he explained. “You see
I didn’t realize it was a promise exactly, and now
it’s just out of the question. You see everything
we’ve got is in Ornaby Addition and so——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Then sell it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What? Why, I wouldn’t have anything left
at all if I did that at this stage of the work. You
see——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Then put a mortgage on it. People can always
get money by mortgages.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan rubbed his forehead. “I’ve already got a
mortgage on it,” he said. “That’s where the money
came from I’m workin’ with now.” He sighed, then
went on more cheerfully. “But just wait till you
see it, Lena. We’ll drive out there first thing to-morrow
morning and you’ll understand right away
what a big thing you and I own together. You just
wait! Why, two or three weeks from now—maybe
only two or three days from now—you’ll be as enthusiastic
over Ornaby as I am!” He leaned over
her, smiling, and took her hand. “Honestly, Lena,
I don’t want to brag—I wouldn’t want to brag to
you, the last person in the world—but honestly, I believe
it’s goin’ to be the biggest thing that’s ever been
done in this town. You see if we can only get the city
limits extended and run a boulevard out there——”</p>

<p class="pindent">But here she startled him; she snatched her hand
away and burst into a convulsive sobbing that shook
every inch of her. “Oh, dear!” she wailed. “I’m
trapped! I’m trapped!”</p>

<p class="pindent">This was all he could get from her during the next
half hour; that she was “trapped,” repeated over
and over in a heartbroken voice at intervals in the
sobbing; and Dan, agonized at the sight and sound
of such poignantly genuine suffering, found nothing to
offer in the way of effective solace. He tried to pet
her, to stroke her forehead, but at every such impulse
of his she tossed away from his extended hand.
Then, in desperation, he fell back upon renewed entreaties
that she would eat, tempting her with appetizing
descriptions of the food he had brought and,
when these were so unsuccessful that she made him
carry the untouched tray out into the hall and leave
it there, he returned to make further prophecies of
the restorative powers of Ornaby Addition.</p>

<p class="pindent">Once she saw Ornaby, he said, she would be fairly
in love with it; and he was so unfortunate as to add
that he knew she would soon get used to his grandmother
and like her.</p>

<p class="pindent">Lena was growing somewhat more composed until
he spoke of his grandmother; but instantly, as if the
relation between this cause and its effect had already
established itself as permanently automatic, she
uttered a loud cry of pain, the sobbing again became
convulsive; and Dan perceived that for a considerable
time to come it would be better to omit even the
mention of Mrs. Savage in his wife’s presence.</p>

<p class="pindent">Darkness came upon the room where Lena tossed
and lamented, and the young husband walked up
and down until she begged him to stop. He sat by
an open window, helplessly distressed to find that
whatever he did seemed to hurt her; for, when he
had been silent awhile she wailed piteously, “Oh,
heavens! Why can’t you <span class="it">say</span> something?” And
when he began to speak reassuringly of the climate,
telling her that the oppressive weather was only “a
little hot spell,” she tossed and moaned the more.</p>

<p class="pindent">So the long evening passed in slow, hot hours
laden with emotions that also burned. From the
window Dan saw the family carriage return from Mrs.
Savage’s; the horses shaking themselves in their
lathered harness when they halted on the driveway
to let Harlan out. He went indoors, to the library
as usual, Dan guessed vaguely; and after a while Mr.
and Mrs. Oliphant came from the house and walked
slowly up and down the path that led through the
lawn to the gate. They were “taking the air”—or
as much of it as there was to be taken—and, walking,
thus together, the two figures seemed to express
a congeniality Dan had never before noticed with
attention, although he had been aware of it all his
life. Both of them had retained their slenderness,
and in the night were so youthful looking that they
might have been taken for a pair of young lovers,
except for the peacefulness seeming to be theirs.
This emanation of a serenity between them suddenly
became perceptible to their son as a surprising thing;
and he looked down upon them wonderingly.</p>

<p class="pindent">There came a querulous inquiry from the bed.
“What on earth are you staring at?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Only father and mother. They’re outdoors
coolin’ off.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Good heavens!” Lena said. “Cooling off!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You’re feelin’ better now, aren’t you, Lena?” he
asked hopefully.</p>

<p class="pindent">“ ‘Better!’ ” she wailed. “Oh, heavens!”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan rested his elbows on the window-sill, and his
chin on his hands. “They’re comin’ in, now,” he
said after a while. “They’ve had their little evening
walk in the yard together. They nearly always do
that when the weather isn’t too cold.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“ ‘Cold?’ I suppose this place gets just as cold in
winter as it does hot in summer!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It <span class="it">does</span> get pretty cold here in winter sometimes,”
the thoughtless Dan said, with a touch of
pride. “Why, last February——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, heavens!” Lena wailed; and she began to
weep again.</p>

<p class="pindent">About midnight she was quiet, and Dan, going
near her, discovered that she drowsed. His foot
touched something upon the carpet, and he picked
up the string of artificial pearls, put it upon the
table beside the bed, then tiptoed out of the room,
closing the door with great care to make no noise.
The house was silent and solidly dark as he went
down the broad stairway and opened the front door
to let himself out into the faint illumination of the
summer night. It was a night profoundly hushed
and motionless; and within it, enclosed in heat, the
town lay prostrate.</p>

<p class="pindent">Sighing heavily, the young husband walked to and
fro upon the short grass of the lawn, wondering what
had “happened” to Lena—as he thought of it—to
upset her so; wondering, too, what had happened to
himself, that since he had married her she had most
of the time seemed to him to be, not the Lena he
thought he knew, but an inexplicable stranger. This
was a mystery beyond his experience, and he could
only sigh and shake his inadequate head; meanwhile
pacing beneath the midnight stars. But they
were neither puzzled nor surprised, those experienced
stars, so delicately bright in the warm sky,
for they had looked down upon uncounted other
young husbands in his plight and pacing as he
did.</p>

<p class="pindent">By and by he stood still, aware of another presence
in the dimness of the neighbouring yard. The only
sound in all the world seemed to be a minute tinkling
and plashing of water where the stoic swan maintained
himself at his duty while other birds slept; but
upon the stone rim of the fountain Dan thought
he discerned a white figure sitting. He went to the
fence between the two lawns to make sure, and found
that he was right; a large and graceful woman sat
there, leaning over and drawing one hand meditatively
to and fro through the water.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Martha?” he said in a low voice.</p>

<p class="pindent">She looked up, said “Dan!” under her breath,
and came to the fence. “Why, you poor thing!
You’re still in that heavy long coat!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Am I?” he asked vaguely. “I hadn’t noticed.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“ ‘Hadn’t noticed?’ In this weather!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It <span class="it">is</span> fairly hot,” he said, as though this circumstance
had just been called to his attention.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Then why don’t you take it off?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“My coat?” he returned absently. “I don’t mind
it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I do,” Martha said. “You don’t need to bother
about talking to <span class="it">me</span> with your coat off, do you?
It’s only a dozen years or so since we hid our shoes
and stockings in the harness closet in your stable and
ran off barefoot to go wading in the street after a
thunderstorm. Take it off.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well——” He complied, explaining, “I just
came out to get cool.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“So did I; but I don’t believe it can be done, Dan.
I believe this is the worst night for sheer hotness
we’ve had in two or three years. I haven’t felt it
so much since the day I landed in New York from
Cherbourg, summer before last. I’ll never forget
that day!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“In New York?” he asked, astonished.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I should say so! I suppose I felt it more because
I was just from abroad, but I think people from our
part of the country suffer fearfully from the heat in
New York, anyhow.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I believe they do,” he said thoughtfully. “And
New York people suffer from the heat when they
come out here. That must be it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Do you think so?” She appeared to be surprised.
“I don’t see how New York people could
mind the heat anywhere else very much after what
they get at home.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, but they do, Martha! They suffer terribly
from heat if they come out here, for instance. You
see they don’t spend the summers in New York.
They either go abroad in summer or else to the
country.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Does she?” Martha asked quickly; but corrected
herself. “Do they?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes,” he said, seeming to be unaware of the
correction. “That’s why it upsets her so. You
see——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well——” he said, hesitating. “It—it does kind
of upset her. It——” He paused, then added lamely,
“It’s just the heat, though. That’s all seems to be
really the matter; she can’t stand the weather.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“She’ll get used to it,” Martha said gently. “You
mustn’t worry, Dan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, I don’t. In a few days she’ll probably see
how lovely it really is here, and she’ll begin to enjoy
it and be more like herself. Everything’ll be all
right in a day or so; I’m sure of that.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, Dan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Of course just now, what with the heat and all
and everybody strangers to her, why, it’s no wonder
it makes her feel a little upset. Anybody <span class="it">would</span> be,
but in a few days from now”—he hesitated, and concluded,
with a somewhat lame insistence, “Well,
it’ll all be entirely different.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, Dan,” she said again, but there was an
almost imperceptible tremble in her voice, and his
attention was oddly caught by it.</p>

<p class="pindent">All his mind had been upon the suffering little
bride, but there was something in the quality of this
tremulousness in Martha’s voice that made him think
about Martha, instead. And suddenly he looked
at her with the same wonder he had felt earlier this
queer evening, when he noticed for the first time
that emanation of serenity between his father and
mother. For there seemed to be something about
Martha, too, that he had known familiarly all his
life, but had never thought of before.</p>

<p class="pindent">There is indeed a light that is light in darkness, and
these strange moments of revelation, when they
come, are brought most often by the night. Daylight,
showing too many things, may afterwards
doubt them, but they are real and not to be forgotten.
They are only moments; and yet, while this one had
its mystic little life, Dan was possessed in part by
the feeling, altogether vague, that somewhere a peculiar
but indefinable mistake had been made by
somebody not identified to him.</p>

<p class="pindent">Moreover, here was matter more curious still:
this thing he had all his life known about Martha,
but had never realized until now, made her in a moment
a woman new to him, so that she seemed to
stand there, facing him across the iron fence, a new
Martha. He had no definition in words for what he
felt, nor sought one; but it was as if he found himself
in possession of an ineffable gift, inexpressibly valuable
and shining vaguely in the darkness. This
shining, wan and touching, seemed to come from
Martha herself; and this newness of hers, that was
yet so old, put a glamour about her. The dim, kind
face and shimmering familiar figure were beautiful,
he saw, never before having had consciousness of
her as beautiful; but what most seemed to glow upon
him out of the glamour about her was the steadfastness
within her; for that was the jewel worn by
the very self of her and shining upon him in the
night.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Martha——” he said in a low voice.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, Dan?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You’ve always been such a friend of mine, I—I—I’ve
never said much about how I feel about it.
I haven’t got anything I wouldn’t sooner part with,
Martha.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I hope so,” she said gently, and bowed her head
in a kind of meekness. “I hope so, Dan, but——”
She stopped.</p>

<p class="pindent">“But what, Martha?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’m afraid,” she said slowly, “your wife isn’t
going to like me.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, but she will,” he returned, trying to put
heartiness into this assurance. “She’s bound to!
Why, everybody in the world likes you, Martha.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No; I had the feeling as soon as I spoke to her
that she never would, Dan. It was just a feeling,
but I’m afraid it’ll turn out so. That doesn’t mean
I won’t try my best to make her.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You won’t need to try. Of course just now she’s
suffering so terribly, poor little thing——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Poor Dan!” Martha said, as he stopped speaking
and sighed instead. “You never <span class="it">could</span> bear to
see anybody suffer. The trouble is it always makes
you suffer more than the person that’s doing the
original suffering.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, no. But I don’t know what on earth to do
for her. Of course, in a few days, when she begins
to see what it’s really <span class="it">like</span> here, and I get her to understand
a little more about the Addition——”</p>

<p class="pindent">He stopped, startled to hear his name called in a
querulous little voice from an upstairs window.</p>

<p class="pindent">“She’s awake,” he said in a whisper.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Who on earth are you talking with out there?”
called the querulous voice.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Good-night,” he whispered, moving away hurriedly;
but, looking back, he saw that Martha remained
at the separating iron fence, leaning upon it
now; and he could feel, rather than see, that she
was not looking at him, but that her head was again
bowed in the same meekness with which she had
said she hoped he prized her feeling for him.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XI</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="dropcap">T</span>HE doleful bride remained in bed all the
next day, prostrate under the continuing
heat;—in fact, it was not until a week had
passed that she felt herself able to make the excursion
projected by the hopeful bridegroom; and when
they finally did set forth, in Dan’s light runabout, she
began to suffer before they reached the gates of the
carriage driveway.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, dear!” she said. “Is it going to be bumpy
like this all the way? It hurts my back.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan apologized. “I’m sorry I didn’t have those
holes in the drive filled up; I’ll do it myself this evening.
But here on the avenue,” he said, as they
turned north from the gates, “we’ll have this fine
cedar-block pavement for quite a good way.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, dear!” she complained. “It’s worse on the
cedar-block pavement than it was in your driveway.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It <span class="it">is</span> a little teeny bit jolty,” Dan admitted.
“You see this pavement’s been down over five years
now, but it’s held out mighty well when you consider
the traffic that’s been over it—mighty well!
It’s been one of the finest pavements I ever saw in
any town.”</p>

<p class="pindent">She gave a little moan. “You talk as if what it
<span class="it">has</span> been were a great help to us now. It <span class="it">does</span> hurt
my back, Dan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, it isn’t goin’ to keep on like this,” he assured
her comfortingly. “The contracts are already
signed for a new pavement. Six months from
now this’ll all be as smooth as a billiard table.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But we have to go over it to-<span class="it">day</span>!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“That’s why I thought the runabout would be
pleasanter for you,” he said. “Our old family carriage
is more comfortable in some ways, but it hasn’t
got rubber tires. I hardly notice the bumps myself
with these tires.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“<span class="it">I</span> do!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Think what a great invention it is, though,” he
said cheerfully. “Why, before long I shouldn’t
wonder if you’d see almost everything that rolls
usin’ rubber tires, and a good many such light traps
as this with inflated ones like bicycles. If horseless
carriages ever amount to anything, they’ll get to
usin’ inflated rubber tires, too, most likely.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, dear me!” Lena sighed. “Doesn’t this heat
ever relent a <span class="it">little</span>?”</p>

<p class="pindent">He assured her that it did; that the hot spell would
soon be over, and that she wouldn’t mind it when
they reached the Addition, which was on higher
ground. “It’s always cool out at Ornaby,” he said
proudly. “The mean level’s twenty-eight feet higher
than it is in this part of the city; and I never saw the
day when you couldn’t find a breeze out there.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Then hurry and get there! It must be a terribly
long way. I don’t see any higher ground ahead of
us—nothing but this eternal flatness and flatness
and flatness! I don’t see how you people stand it.
I should think somebody would <span class="it">build</span> a hill!”</p>

<p class="pindent">He laughed and told her that Ornaby was almost
a hill. “Practically, it is,” he said. “Anyhow it’s a
sort of plateau—practically. You see the mean
level——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, dear!” she sighed; and for a time they jogged
on in silence.</p>

<p class="pindent">He drove with one hand, holding over her with the
other a green silk parasol, a performance not lacking
in gallantry, nor altogether without difficulty, for
his young horse was lively, in spite of the weather;
yet it is doubtful if strangers, seeing the runabout
pass, would have guessed the occupants a bride and
groom.</p>

<p class="pindent">Beneath the broad white rim of Lena’s straw hat
the pretty little face was contorted with discontent;
while her companion’s expression showed a puzzled
discouragement not customarily associated with the
expressions of bridegrooms. True, the discouragement
passed before long, but it came back again after
a little more conversation. Then it disappeared
again, but returned when signs of capricious weather
were seen in the sky. For it is new knowledge to nobody
that the weather has an uneducated humour
and will as soon play the baboon with a bride and
groom, or with a kind cripple on an errand of mercy,
as it will with the hardiest ruffian. But at first Dan
welcomed the hints of change in the southwest.</p>

<p class="pindent">“By George!” he said, nodding across the vast flat
cornfields upon their left, for the runabout had now
come into the open country. “<span class="it">There’s</span> good news,
Lena.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What is?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Look over yonder. We’re goin’ to get rain, and
Heaven knows we need it! Look.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Along the southwest horizon of cornfields and distant
groves they saw a thickening nucleus of dark
haze. Out of it, clouds of robust sculpture were
slowly rising, muttering faintly as they rose, as if
another planet approached and its giants grumbled,
being roused from sleep to begin the assault.</p>

<p class="pindent">“By George, that’s great!” Dan exclaimed in high
delight. “That’s worth millions of dollars to the
farmers, Lena.”</p>

<p class="pindent">But Lena was as far as possible from sharing his
enthusiasm. “I believe it’s going to be a thunderstorm.
Turn back. I hate thunderstorms. I’m
afraid of them.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, they won’t hurt you, Lena.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“They frighten me and they do kill people. Please
turn back.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But we’re almost there, dear. I think the rain’ll
hold off, probably, but if it doesn’t we’d be more
likely to get wet goin’ all the way back home than if
we went ahead. I’ve got a tool shed out there we
could wait under.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“A tool shed? With all the tools <span class="it">in</span> it? That’s
just where the lightning would strike first!”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan laughed and tried to reassure her, but although
they drove on in the bright sunshine for a
time, she became more and more nervous. “It almost
seems to me you don’t <span class="it">want</span> to do things I want
you to. We should have turned back when I first
spoke of it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Look, dear,” he said. “Just ahead of us there’s
something you’re goin’ to be mighty proud of some
day. It’s Ornaby Addition, Lena!”</p>

<p class="pindent">Before them the dirt road, grown with long grass
between the ruts, had been widened to the dimensions
of a city street as it passed between old forest groves
of beech and elm, through which other wide rough
roads had recently been cut. Beyond the woods
were some open fields, where lines of stakes were
driven in the ground to outline—apparently in a mood
of over-optimistic prophecy—some scores of building
lots and various broad avenues. But so far as could
be seen from the runabout, felled trees and wooden
stakes were all that proved Ornaby to be an Addition
and not a farm, though a few negroes were burning
the remnants of a rail fence in a field not far from
the road. And what made the whole prospect rather
desolate was the malicious caprice of the weather;—the
very moment when Dan stopped the runabout
and waved his hand in a proud semicircle of display,
the first of the robust clouds passed over the
sun and Ornaby lay threatened in a monstrous
shadow.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Look, Lena!” the exultant proprietor cried.
“This is Ornaby!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Is it?” she said desolately. “I do wish you’d
turned round when I said. It’s going to thunder
and lighten horribly, and I know I’m going to be
frightened to death.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Then, as a louder rumble sounded in the sky, she
shivered, clutching Dan’s arm. “I <span class="it">know</span> that struck
somewhere!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It might have struck somewhere in the next
county,” he laughed.</p>

<p class="pindent">“What! Why, look at the sky right over us. I
never saw anything so awful.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan laughed again and patted her small, clutching
hand soothingly. “It’s just a pleasant little summer
thundershower, Lena.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Little!” she cried. “Do you call storms like
this ‘little’ out here?”</p>

<p class="pindent">For, in truth, Dan’s reassuring word was not well
supported by the aspect of the sky. Above them
hung what appeared to be a field of inverted gray
haystacks, while from westward ragged, vast draperies
advanced through a saffron light that suddenly
lay upon all the land. A snort of wind tore at the
road, carrying dust high aloft; then there was a curious
silence throughout all the great space of the saffron
light, and some large raindrops fell in a casual
way, then stopped.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You see?” said the cheery Dan. “That’s all
we’ll get, likely enough. I shouldn’t be surprised
it’d clear up now.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“ ‘Clear up!’ ” Lena cried incredulously. “I do
believe you’re crazy! Oh, <span class="it">heavens</span>!”</p>

<p class="pindent">And the heavens she thus adjured appeared heartily
inclined to warrant her outcry. Satan fell from
the sky in a demoniac swoop of lightning, carrying
darkness with him; wind and water struck the runabout
together; and Dan was fain to drive into the
woods beside the road, while Lena clung to him and
wailed. He tied the trembling horse to a tree, and
got the bride and her wrecked parasol under the
inadequate shelter of the tool house he had mentioned,
but found little happiness there. A hinge
had broken; the negroes had carried the door away to
repair it; the roof leaked everywhere and was sonorous
with the hail that fell presently with the heavy
rain. At every bedazzlement of the lightning Lena
gasped, then shrieked throughout the ensuing uproar,
and before long whimpered that she was
freezing. In fact, her wet clothes, little more than
gauze, appeared to be dissolving upon her, while the
air grew cold with the hail.</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan put his soggy coat about her, petted her, and
piled wet sticks together, saying that he would make
a fire for her if he could. Whereupon she wept and
uttered a pathetic laughter. “Burn up with the heat
one minute,” she said, through chattering teeth,
“and the next freeze to death if you can’t make a
fire! What a place!”</p>

<p class="pindent">Of course Dan defended his climate, but his argument
was of as little avail as were his attempts to
build a fire with sodden wood and drenched matches.
Lena suffered from the cold as expressively as she
had from the heat, and forgetting that these changes
in temperature had not been unknown to her in
her own native habitat and elsewhere, she convinced
herself perfectly that all of her troubles were put
upon her by “the West.” Yet in this she was not
so unreasonable as might appear;—our sufferings
from interior disturbances are adept in disguising
themselves as inflictions from outside.</p>

<p class="pindent">These troubles of hers were not alleviated by two
unfortunate remarks made by her young husband in
the course of his efforts to hearten her. After one
of the numerous electrical outrages, appalling in
brilliancy and uproar, he said he was sorry he couldn’t
have taken her to the old Ornaby farmhouse for
shelter; and when Lena reproached him for not having
thought of this sooner, he explained too hastily
that the house had been struck by lightning and
burned to the ground during a thunderstorm earlier
in the summer. After that, as she became almost
hysterical, he straightway went on to his second
blunder. “But nobody was hurt,” he said. “Nobody
at all, Lena. There wasn’t anybody in the
house; and anyhow I don’t believe the lightning’s
really struck right near us during this whole shower.
Why, it’s nothin’ at all; I’ve seen storms a thousand
times worse than this. Only last summer I got
caught out on a little lake, north of here, in a canoe,
and pretty near a real tornado came up, with thunder
and lightning that would make this little racket
to-day look like something you’d get from a baby’s
toy. We didn’t mind it; we just——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“ ‘We?’ Who?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Martha Shelby was with me,” the incautious Dan
replied. “Why, you ought to’ve seen how she
behaved, Lena! <span class="it">She</span> didn’t mind it; she just laughed
and kept on paddlin’ like a soldier. I honestly think
she enjoyed it. Now, why can’t you——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You hush!” Lena cried.</p>

<p class="pindent">“But I only——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Haven’t I enough to bear? Be quiet!”</p>

<p class="pindent">He obeyed, gazing out upon the tumultuous landscape,
and wondering sadly what made her so angry
with him. Then, all at once, beyond and through
the mazes of tossing rain he seemed to see, however
vaguely, the new Martha he had recognized in that
queer night after his homecoming; and the recollection
of their strange moment together brought him
another not unlike it now. Something mystic operated
here; he felt again that same enrichment,
charged with an indefinite regret; and though the
moment was no more than a moment, passing
quickly, it comforted him a little. “There! Don’t
worry!” Martha seemed to say to him gently. So
he said it to himself and felt in better spirits.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh! Oh! Oh!” Lena wept, huddling in a corner
of the shed. “How this horrible old world <span class="it">does</span>
make us pay for not knowing what to do!” And
when he turned to try again to soothe her, she shrank
but farther away from him and bade him let her
alone.</p>

<p class="pindent">“But it’ll be all cleared up, half an hour from now,”
he said. “You’ll be warm as toast as soon as the
sun comes out again, and then we’ll go over the whole
Addition and see what’s what, Lena!”</p>

<p class="pindent">The first half of this prediction was amply fulfilled;
Lena was indeed warm soon after the sun reappeared;
but they did not inspect the Addition
further. They went home, and a few days later Lena
wrote an account of the expedition in a letter to her
brother George. Not altogether happy when she
wrote, she was unable to refrain from a little natural
exaggeration.</p>

<div class="blockquote100percent">

<p class="pindent"><span style="font-size:smaller">You said to me once you’d like to come here to live. Read
Martin Chuzzlewit again before you do. “<span class="it">Eden!</span>” That’s what
the famous Ornaby Addition looks like! It isn’t swampy, but
that’s all the difference I could see. We drove miles in the heat
and choking dust and there wasn’t anything to see when we got
there! Just absolutely nothing! People had been digging
around in spots and cutting a lot of trees down and after a
cyclone and cloudburst that came up while we were there he
pointed out a post sticking out of the ground and showed the
greatest pride because it had “47th St.” painted on it! This was
when we were driving out of the woods. He wanted to poke all
over the dreary place, looking at other posts and stumps of
trees, but I couldn’t stand any more of it.</span></p>

<p class="pindent"><span style="font-size:smaller">We had the most horrible storm I was ever out in, and it
hailed so that after being ill in bed for a week with the ghastly
heat, it got so cold I almost died, and then as soon as the cyclone
was over it got hot again—it isn’t like ordinary heat; it gets hot
with a sticky heaviness I can’t express and the thermometer
must stay up over 100 even at night—and as soon as we got
home I had to go to bed where I’ve been ever since—hence this
pencil—and I’ve just escaped pneumonia! And during the
cyclone when I was really ill with the nervous anguish lightning
always causes me, he began telling me how wonderfully a former
sweetheart of his behaved in a storm on a lake! It was his idea
of how to make me not mind it. Of course he only meant to
cheer me up—but <span class="it">really</span>!</span></p>

<p class="pindent"><span style="font-size:smaller">His father and mother aren’t bad, I must say. They’re quite
like him, good-looking and full of kindness; his mother is really
sweet and I like them both, though I’ll <span class="it">never</span> get used to hearing
people talk with this terrible Western accent. To a sensitive
ear, it’s actual pain. The brother looks rather like Dan, too;
but he’s pompous in a dry way and affected. Reads heavy
things and seems to me a cold-hearted sort of prig, though he’s
always polite. The father and mother read, too. Their idea is
Carlyle and Emerson and Thoreau—<span class="it">you</span> know the type of mind—and
Harlan (the brother) talks about that Englishman, Shaw,
who writes the queer plays. They say they have two theatres
open in winter, but of course there’s no music here except something
they brag about called the “April Festival,” when there’s
a week of imported orchestra and some singing. Pleasant for
<span class="it">me</span>!—one week in the year!—though I suppose <span class="it">you’ll</span> think it’s all
I should have.</span></p>

<p class="pindent"><span style="font-size:smaller">They meant to be kind, but they gave me the most fearful
“reception.” I never endured such a ghastly ordeal. The
weather was over 100 in the shade—and in crowded rooms, well,
imagine it! The people were dressed well enough—some of
them were rather queer, but so are some at home—but I wish
you could have seen the vehicles they drive in and their coachmen!
Slouchy darkies in old straw hats with long-tailed horses
that get the reins under their tails—and fringed surreys and
family carryalls, something like what you’d see out in the country
towns in Connecticut. They have phaetons and runabouts
and a few respectable traps, but I’ve seen just one good-looking
victoria since I came here. They don’t <span class="it">like</span> smartness really. I
believe they think it’s effeminate!</span></p>

<p class="pindent"><span style="font-size:smaller">The real head of the Oliphant family is an outrageous old
hag, Dan’s grandmother, who behaved terribly to me at my only
meeting with her—it will remain our only meeting! They’re all
afraid of her, and she has a lot of money. Queer—I understand
he’s tried to raise money for his Eden all over the town, but never
asked the terrible grandmother. She doesn’t believe in it, and I
must say she’s right about <span class="it">that</span>! Rather!</span></p>

<p class="pindent"><span style="font-size:smaller">How strange that any girl should do what I’ve done—and
with my eyes wide open! I did it, and yet I knew he didn’t
understand me. I ought to have known that he can <span class="it">never</span> understand
me, that we don’t speak the same language and never will.
I ought to have realized what it means to know that I must live
days, weeks, months, <span class="it">years</span> with a person who will never understand
anything whatever of my real self!</span></p>

<p class="pindent"><span style="font-size:smaller">Yet I still care for him, and he is good. He does a thousand
little kind things for me that do not help me at all, and the truth
is most of them only irritate me. How odd it is that I write to
you about not being understood—you who are seldom kind to me
and often most unjust! Yet in a way I have always felt that
you do understand me a little—perhaps unsympathetically—but
at least you give me the luxury of being <span class="it">partly</span> understood.</span></p>

<p class="pindent"><span style="font-size:smaller">Yes, I still care for him, but when I think of his awful Ornaby
thing I sometimes believe I have married a madman. It is
nothing <span class="it">as I said</span>—hopeless—a devastated farm—and yet when
he speaks of it his eye lights up and he begins to walk about and
gesture and talk as if he actually saw houses and streets—and
shops—and thousands of people living there! If this isn’t hallucination,
I don’t know what hallucination means.</span></p>

<p class="pindent"><span style="font-size:smaller">But since our excursion to the place I’ve almost cured him of
talking about it to <span class="it">me</span>! I just can’t <span class="it">stand</span> it! And what is
pleasant, I think he probably goes to talk about it to another
woman. Already! A perfectly enormous girl seven or eight
feet tall that he’d picked out to be my most intimate friend!
Because she’s been <span class="it">his</span> most intimate friend, of course. But I
suppose all men are like <span class="it">that</span>.</span></p>

<p class="pindent"><span style="font-size:smaller">The heat did relax for a day or two—but it’s back again.
Sometimes I can’t believe I am actually in this place—apparently
for life—and I begin to hope that I’ll wake up. I think
even you would pity me sometimes, George.</span></p>

</div>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XII</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="dropcap">I</span>N THE minds of Mrs. Savage’s neighbours across
the street and of the habitual passers-by, that
broad plate-glass window where it was her custom
to sit for the last hour of every afternoon had
come to bear the significance of a glass over a portrait.
All long thoroughfares and many of even the
shortest have such windows; and the people who repeatedly
pass that way will often find the portrait
window becoming a part, however slight, of their
own lives; but it will seldom be an enduring part, except
as a fugitive, pathetic memory. For a time the
silent old face is seen framed there every day, or it
may be a pale and wistful child looking out gravely
upon the noisy world. Then abruptly one day the
window is only a window and no more a portrait;
the passer-by has a moment of wonder whenever he
goes by, but presently may have his faintly troubled
question answered by a wreath on the door; and
afterwards the window that was once a portrait will
seem to him a little haunted.</p>

<p class="pindent">Mrs. Savage’s window had been a portrait so long
that even the school children who went homeward
that way in the autumn afternoons noticed a
vacancy behind the glass and missed her from the
frame; but new seasons came and passed, and no
wreath appeared upon her door. She had been so
thoroughly alive for so many years that the separation
of herself from life could not be abrupt, even if
she wished it. She did not wish it she told Harlan,
one rainy night, as he sat beside her bed after bringing
her the news that she was a great-grandmother.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I suppose it seems funny to you,” she said.
“You must wonder why an old woman with nothing
to live for would still want to live. I suppose you
think it’s because I just want to eat a little more and
to lie here listening to that!” With a hand now become
the very ghost of a hand, she gestured toward
a window where the parted curtains revealed black
panes slushed with noisy water by the strong west
wind. “How you must wonder!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, no,” Harlan said, though she spoke the truth.
“I don’t wonder at all, grandma.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, you do! How could a young person help
wondering about such a thing? Year before last I
could still go out for a little walk; last year I could
only go for a drive in the afternoons. After that I
could still get downstairs and sit by the window; then
I couldn’t even do that, and could only hobble around
upstairs;—then I couldn’t even get into another room
without being helped. And now for a month I’ve
not been able to get out of bed—and I’ll never be
able to. No wonder you wonder I want to hang on!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But I don’t,” he insisted. “I don’t, indeed.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You do. What do you think I have to live for?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, partly for your family, grandma. We’re
all devoted to you; and besides you have your memories—I
know you have many happy memories.”</p>

<p class="pindent">She laughed feebly, but nevertheless with audible
asperity, interrupting his rather stumbling reassurances.
“ ‘Happy memories!’ Young people are always
talking about ‘happy memories’; and they
think old people ‘live in their happy memories.’ I
advise you not to look forward to spending your old
age in that way! There’s no such thing, young man.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No such thing as a happy memory?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Not when you’re as old as I am,” she said. “You
can only have a happy memory of something when
you can look forward to something of the same kind
happening again; but I can’t look forward to anything.
Yet I still want to hang on!”</p>

<p class="pindent">Harlan laughed gently. “Then doesn’t that prove
you do look forward to something, grandma?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No,” she said. “It only proves I still have a
little curiosity. I’d like to live twenty years just
to prove I’m right about how this baby’s going to
turn out.”</p>

<p class="pindent">The implication of her tone was grim with conviction—clearly
she spoke of a baby who could not turn
out well—and Harlan was amused by his own perception
of a little drama: his grandmother, clinging
with difficulty to one extreme edge of life and prophesying
only black doom for this new person who
had just crawled up into life over the opposite extreme
edge. “I’m sorry you feel so gloomy about
that baby, grandma. I’m rather pleased, myself,
to be an uncle, and so far I haven’t been worrying
about his future. Don’t you think there’s a chance
for him?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Not with such a mother and father,” the old lady
promptly replied. “Dan oughtn’t to have mixed
with such a stock as that painted-up little photograph
girl.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Harlan protested a little; coming to Lena’s defense
at least in this detail. “But I understand that the
particular foible of the McMillan family is the magnificence
of their stock, as you call it, grandma. It
seems they’re so proud of it they don’t think of much
else.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes; that’s always a sign a stock’s petered out.
When people <span class="it">put</span> a lot on what their folks used to do,
it always means they haven’t got gimp enough left
to do anything themselves. The minute I laid eyes
on her picture I knew she came from a no-account
stock; and when your mother gave her that reception
everybody in town could tell right off what she was.
Painted! <span class="it">That</span> tells the story!”</p>

<p class="pindent">Again Harlan protested on behalf of his sister-in-law.
“Oh, I shouldn’t make too much of that,
grandma. A little rouge now and then——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“ ‘A little rouge!’ ” the old lady echoed satirically.
“She was plastered with it! That doesn’t make any
difference though, because a woman that uses it at
all is a bad woman and wants the men to know it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, no, no!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It’s so,” the old lady cried as fiercely as her enfeebled
voice permitted. “It’s the truth, and you’ll
live to see I’m right. I don’t want you to forget
then that I told you so. You remember it, Harlan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, grandma,” he said placatively. “I will
if——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t want any ‘if’ about it. You remember
what I’m telling you! She’s bad!” Mrs. Savage
spoke so vehemently that she had to pause and let
her quickened breathing become more regular;—then
she went on: “Look how she’s treated me. If she’d
had the right stuff in her, she’d have been grateful to
me for giving her a lesson. If she’d been just a
foolish girl who’d made a mistake and painted herself
because she wanted to look healthier when she
met her new husband’s friends, why, she might have
got a little pettish with me for showing her it was a
mistake the way I did, but long before now she’d
have forgiven me and thanked me for doing it. Not
she! That was the last time I set foot out of doors;
and has she ever come to see me? She’s never been
near me! What’s more, she’s done her best to keep
Dan from ever coming here. When he <span class="it">has</span> come I
know he hasn’t dared to tell her. Do you deny
it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">Harlan shook his head. “No, I’m afraid I can’t,
grandma.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Do you know why she hates me so?” the old lady
demanded. “It’s because she’s bad, and she knows
I know it. People never forgive you for knowing
they’re bad. And now she’s brought this baby into
the world to inherit her badness, and you sit there and
wonder I say the child’s bound to turn out wrong.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Grandma!” the young man exclaimed, laughing.
“I only wonder you don’t take into account the fact
that the baby is Dan’s, too. Dan may be a rather
foolish sort of person—in fact, I think he is—but
surely you’ve never thought him bad.”</p>

<p class="pindent">The old lady looked at her grandson querulously.
“Don’t be so superior, young man. That’s always
been your trouble—you think you’re the only perfect
person in the world.” And when he would have protested,
defending himself, she checked him sharply
and went on: “Never mind! I’m talking about
other things now. The trouble with Dan is that he’s
never seen anything as it really is and never will—not
in all the days of his life! He was that way
even when he was a boy. I remember once you hurt
his feelings about some poor little brackets he was
making with a little Jew boy. He thought the
brackets were perfect, and he thought the little Jew
boy was perfect, too. When you criticized them
both he got into such a spasm of crying he had to
go home to bed.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes,” Harlan said, smiling faintly; “I remember.
He was always like that.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, and always will be. So he’ll think this
child of his is perfect, and it’ll never get any discipline.
I’d like to live twenty years just to see the
wrack and ruin that’s going to be made by these
children born nowadays. Their parents got hardly
any discipline at all, and <span class="it">they</span> won’t get <span class="it">any</span>, so they’ll
never know how to respect anything at all. It only
takes a little common sense to see from the start how
this child’ll turn out. With no discipline or respect
for anything, and with such a mother from a petered-out
stock, and a father that hasn’t got a practical
thought in his head, you can just as well as not expect
the child to be in the penitentiary by the time
he’s twenty years old!” Then, as Harlan laughed,
the old lady uttered a faint sound of laughter herself,
not as if admitting that she exaggerated anything,
however, but grimly. “You’ll see!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You’re right about it this far,” Harlan said.
“Dan already thinks the baby’s perfect.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Happy, is he?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“The usual triumphant young father. More triumphant
than the usual one, I should say. He went
whooping over the house till mother had to stop him
and send him outdoors to keep him from disturbing
Lena.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes; that’s like him,” the old lady said. “How
queer it is; there are people who can always find
something to whoop about, no matter what happens.
Your grandfather was like that when he was a young
man. Even when we were poor as Job’s turkey he’d
burst out cackling and laughing over anything at all.
I used to just look at him and wonder. Dan’s desperate
for money, isn’t he?”</p>

<p class="pindent">Harlan coughed, frowned, and then looked faintly
amused. “Yes, I should just about use the word
‘desperate.’ I think he is.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“He’ll not get any of mine!” Mrs. Savage said.
“I’d not be very apt to help him anyhow, after the
way his wife’s treated me. He wouldn’t listen to me;
he <span class="it">would</span> marry her, and he <span class="it">would</span> throw all he had
away on that miserable old farm! Now I guess he’s
got nothing more to throw away.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“He’s got rather less than nothing now, grandma.
The place wouldn’t sell for enough to pay the mortgages,
and he hasn’t been able to meet the interest.
Father managed to let him have a thousand dollars
two months ago, but it didn’t go very far. The truth
is, I think Dan’s begun to be a little out of his head
over the thing;—he had twenty teams hauling dirt
while poor father’s thousand lasted. Now he’s
going to lose the place, and I’d think it a fortunate
misfortune if I believed he’d learn anything by it;
but he won’t.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No,” Mrs. Savage agreed gloomily. “He’s like
his grandfather, but he hasn’t got a wife to watch
over him as his grandfather had. He’ll just be up
to some new wastefulness.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“He already is,” Harlan laughed. “You’re extraordinary,
the way you put your finger on things,
grandma. He’s already up to a new wastefulness.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What is it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Horseless carriages,” Harlan informed her. “Automobiles;—‘<span class="it">les
autos</span>,’ I believe the French call them
now. Since old Shelby wouldn’t run a car line out to
the farm, and the city council wouldn’t build a street
to the city boundary, and the county wouldn’t improve
the road, Dan’s got the really magnificent idea
that his Ornaby place could be reached by automobiles.
He believes if the things could be made cheap
enough everybody that’s going to live in Ornaby
Addition could own one and go back and forth in it.
And besides, he expects to build some horseless omnibuses
to run out there from town.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“He expects to?” Mrs. Savage cried, aghast.
“He’s just about to lose everything, yet he expects
to manufacture horseless carriages and omnibuses?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, yes,” Harlan said easily. “<span class="it">He</span> doesn’t
know he’s bankrupt! To hear him you’d think he’s
just beginning to make his fortune and create great
public works.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Jehoshaphat!” In a few extremities during her
long life Mrs. Savage had sought an outlet for her
emotions in this expression; and after using it now
she lay silent for some moments; then gave utterance
to a dry little gasp of laughter. “I guess it’s a good
thing I’ve made a new will! Maybe this girl might
have sense enough to clear out.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Lena?” Harlan asked, for his grandmother’s
voice was little more than a whisper, as if she spoke
to herself; and he was not sure of her words. “Do
you mean you think Lena might leave Dan?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“If he didn’t have any money she might. What
did she marry him for? She’s <span class="it">hated</span> being married
to him, hasn’t she? She must have believed he had
money.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Harlan shook his head. “No,” he said thoughtfully;—“I
don’t believe she’s mercenary. I don’t
think that’s why she married him.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Can’t you use your reason?” the old lady complained
petulantly. “Hasn’t she whined and scolded
every minute since he brought her here?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, it’s not so bad as that, grandma.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Your mother says she stays in her room for days
at a time.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, she gets spells when she’s moody—or at least
just quiet,” Harlan admitted. “But she’s not always
in them by any means. She’s rather amusing
sometimes, and she seems to try to be kind to
Dan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, she ‘seems to try?’ ” Mrs. Savage echoed.
“<span class="it">You</span> seem to try to stand up for her! Do you like
her?”</p>

<p class="pindent">Faced with this abrupt question, Harlan was somewhat
disturbed. “Well, possibly not,” he replied
honestly, after a moment. “No, I can’t say I do.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I thought not. And does she like any of you?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, she’s evidently rather fond of mother—and
of father, too.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Who on earth could help liking <span class="it">them</span>?” Mrs.
Savage cried, and, in her vehemence, seemed about to
rise from her bed. “Do you think <span class="it">that’s</span> to her
credit? She hates everybody and everything <span class="it">else</span>
here, and she nags Dan. That means she thought he
had money, and she married him for it, and now she’s
disappointed. Well, she’ll keep on being disappointed
a good while, so far as <span class="it">my</span> property is
concerned! Then maybe she’ll have sense enough
to leave him and give him a chance to get the woman
he ought to’ve married in the first place.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Harlan looked a little startled as his grandmother
sank back, panting with exhaustion; the spirit within
her was too high and still too passionate for the frail
material left to it. The self of her was indeed without
age, unaltered, and as dominant as it had ever
been, though the instrument through which it communicated,
her strengthless body, was almost perished
out of any serviceableness. To her grandson
there came an odd comparison: it seemed to
him that she was like a vigorous person shouting
through an almost useless telephone that could make
only the tiniest, just perceptible sounds; and he had
an odder thought than this: When the telephone was
entirely broken and silent would she still be trying to
shout through it? She would be shouting somewhere,
he felt sure. But what he said, rather sadly,
was, “Martha? I suppose you mean Martha
Shelby?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Of course! Martha could make something out
of Dan, and she’s never looked at anybody but him,
and she never will. You needn’t expect her to,
either, young man.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Harlan’s colour heightened at this, and some
shadows of sensitiveness about his mouth became
quickly more visible. “Oh, no; of course I don’t,”
he said quietly.</p>

<p class="pindent">“She’ll never marry you,” the terrible old lady went
on. “I know what you’ve been up to—I’ve had my
eyes about me—but you’ll never get her to quit
thinking of Dan. And if this painted-up photograph
girl takes her baby and goes away some day, things
might have a chance to come out right. But <span class="it">you</span>,
young man——” She stopped, beset by a little cough
as feeble as a baby’s, yet enough to check her; and
upon this the professional nurse who now took care
of her appeared in the doorway and gave Harlan the
smiling glance that let him know his call had lasted
long enough.</p>

<p class="pindent">He rose from his chair by the bedside, murmuring
the appropriate cheering phrases;—he was sure his
grandmother would be stronger the next time he
came, and she would soon “get downstairs again,” he
said; while she looked up at him with a strange contemplation
that he sometimes remembered afterwards;
she had so many times in her life said to others
what he was saying to her now. But she let him thus
ease his departure, and responded with only a faintly
gasped, “We’ll hope so,” and “Good-night.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Though he bent over her, her voice was almost inaudible
against the sound of the rain spitefully hammering
the windows; and in the light of the single
green-shaded bulb that hung above the table of tonics
and medicines at the foot of the bed, the whiteness
of her face was almost indistinguishable from the
whiteness of the pillow. She was so nearly a ghost,
indeed, that as he touched the cold hand in farewell,
it seemed to him that if there were ghosts about—his
grandfather, for instance—she might almost as
easily be communing with them as with the living.
She was of their world more than of this wherein she
still wished to linger.</p>

<p class="pindent">Downstairs, the elderly negro who had served her
so long waited to open the door for the parting guest.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You ought to brung you’ papa’s an’ mamma’s
carri’ge, Mist’ Hollun,” he said. “You goin’ git
mighty wet, umbrella or no umbrella.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No doubt, Nimbus.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, suh,” said Nimbus reflectively. “You goin’
swim. How you think you’ grammaw feel to-night?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’m afraid she’s not any stronger. I’m afraid
she won’t be here much longer.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, suh?” The thin old man chuckled a little,
as if to himself. “She awready <span class="it">did</span> be here some few
days! She stay li’l’ while yet, Mist’ Hollun.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You think so?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, suh,” said Nimbus, chuckling again. “Same
way as ’tis ’bout anything else. Some people come
call on you; stay li’l’ while; git up to go, they walk
right out. Some people, they set an’ set an’ set; then
when they git up to go, they don’t go; they keep on
talk, talk, talk. You grammaw she aw-ways do like
that. She goin’ take her time before she walk out
the big door.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I hope so,” Harlan said, as Nimbus unfastened
the old-fashioned brass door-chain for him. “I hope
so, indeed.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, suh; she take her own time,” the coloured
man insisted;—then, opening the door, he stood aside
and inclined himself in a bow that obviously gave
him a satisfaction more than worth the effort. “I
expeck she do you well, Mist’ Hollun.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What?” Harlan asked, pausing to unfurl the
umbrella he had left just outside. “What did you
say, Nimbus?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I mean: What she goin’ do with all that propaty?”
Nimbus explained. “Door she goin’ out of
when she git ready, it’s a mighty big door, but ’tain’t
big enough to tote all that propaty with her—no,
suh! I expeck you goin’ git mighty big slice all that
propaty, Mist’ Hollun. Goo’ ni’, suh.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Harlan laughed, bade him good-night, and strode
forward into the gusty water that drove through the
darkness. Outside the gate, as he turned toward
home, he laughed again, amused by the old negro’s
view of things, but not amused by the things themselves.
Harlan knew that he had never won his
grandmother’s affection; her thought had always
been of his brother and was still of Dan now, as she
lay upon the bed from which she would never rise.
Whatever the terms of her new will might be, and
whatever their actual consequences, she had made
it clear that they were at least designed for Dan’s
ultimate benefit.</p>

<p class="pindent">Harlan had little expectation of any immediate
benefit to himself, notwithstanding the lively hints
of Nimbus; nor were his hopes greater than his expectations.
He had no wish to supplant his brother.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XIII</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="dropcap">H</span>E HAD no wish to supplant his brother in
Mrs. Savage’s will or in anything;—last of
all did he wish to supplant him in the heart
of Martha Shelby. Mrs. Savage had been far from
understanding her grandson’s deep pride, and, as he
strode homeward in the slashing rain, her acrid warnings
that he must not hope for anything from Martha
repeated themselves over and over in his mind, as
such things will, and upon each repetition stung the
more.</p>

<p class="pindent">He thought ruefully of the ancient popular notion
that such stingings come from only the unpleasant
truth. “It hurts him because it’s true,” people say,
sometimes, as if mere insult must ever fail to rankle,
and all accusation not well-founded fall but painlessly
upon the righteous. What Harlan recognized
as possibly nearest the truth among his grandmother’s
unfavourable implications was what hurt
him the least. He did not wholly lack the power of
self-criticism; and he was able to perceive that the
old lady had at least a foundation when she said,
“Don’t be so superior, young man. That’s always
been your trouble.” Harlan was ready to admit that
superiority had always been his trouble.</p>

<p class="pindent">Not definitely, or in so many words, but nevertheless
in fact, he believed himself superior to other
people—even to all other people. Thus, when he
and his brother were children, and their father took
them to Mr. Forepaugh’s circus, Dan was enthusiastic
about a giant seven and a half feet high; but
Harlan remained cold in the lofty presence. True
giants were never less than nine feet tall and this one
was “a pretty poor specimen,” he declared, becoming
so superior in the matter that Dan fell back
upon personalities. “Well, anyhow, he’s taller than
<span class="it">you</span> are, Harlan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’m not in the business of being a giant, thank
you,” Harlan said; and Dan, helplessly baffled by
the retort, because he was unable to analyze it,
missed the chance to understand a fundamental part
of his brother’s character.</p>

<p class="pindent">Harlan did not go into the giant business, yet he
grew up looking down on all giants, since they all
failed to reach the somewhat arbitrary nine feet he
had set for them. He could not give credit to a
struggling giant of seven feet and a half, and admire
him for the difficulties overcome in getting to be at
least that tall; Harlan really looked down upon such
a giant from a height of nine feet.</p>

<p class="pindent">Yet he was able, at times, to perceive his superiority
as an unendearing characteristic and even to
look upon it with some philosophic detachment; he
did not resent his grandmother’s remarks upon that
subject. What he minded was her assumption that
he was trying to take Dan’s place in Martha Shelby’s
heart; Harlan wanted his own place there, or none.</p>

<p class="pindent">He had wanted it ever since Martha was a handsome
romping girl of fourteen and he a fastidious observer
a little older. She was a romp, yet her boyish
romping never lacked a laughing charm; for, although
she was one of those big young girls who seem
to grow almost overwhelmingly, she had the fortunate
gift of gracefulness; she was somehow able to be
large without ever being heavy. And one evening at
a “German” for young people of the age that begins
to be fretful about a correct definition of the word
“children,” she danced lightly to Harlan and unexpectedly
“favoured” him; whereupon something
profound straightway happened to the boy’s emotions.</p>

<p class="pindent">No visible manifestations betrayed the change
within so self-contained a youth; for here his pride,
deep-set even then, was touched;—the lively Martha’s
too obvious preference was always for the brother so
much more of her own sort. Dan was her fellow-romp,
and she would come shouting under the Oliphants’
windows for him as if she were a boy. They
were an effervescent pair, and often rough in their
horseplay with each other; while Harlan, aloof and
cold of eye, would watch them with an inward protest
so sharp that it made him ache.</p>

<p class="pindent">He wanted to make Martha over from a model of
his own devising; he wished her to be more dignified,
and could not understand her childish love of what
to him seemed mere senseless caperings with the
boisterous Dan. Yet neither her caperings nor her
devotion to Dan was able to disperse Harlan’s feeling
for her, which gradually became a kind of customary
faint pain. In a little time—a year or two—the
caperings ceased; Martha went eastward, as
did the brothers, for the acquisition of a polish believed
to be richer in that direction; and when she
returned she had become dignified, as Harlan wished,
but otherwise did not appear to be greatly altered.
Certainly her devotion to Dan was the same; and
her merely becoming dignified failed to alleviate that
customary faint pain of Harlan’s. He still had it,
and with it his long mystification;—he had never
been able to understand why she cared for Dan.</p>

<p class="pindent">Harlan’s view of his brother as a rather foolish
person might have meant no more than superiority’s
tolerant amusement, had that pain and mystification
of his not been involved; but, as matters were, Harlan
would have been superior indeed if all bitterness
had passed him by. He could have submitted,
though with a sorrowing perplexity, to Martha’s inability
to be in love with him; but what sometimes
drove him to utter a burst of stung laughter was the
thought that she had given her heart to a man who
did not even perceive the gift. To Harlan that
seemed to be the supreme foolishness of his foolish
brother.</p>

<p class="pindent">Through the rain, as he opened his own gate, he
saw in the direction of the house next door a line of
faintly glowing oblongs, swept across by wet black
silhouettes of tossing foliage; and since these lighted
windows at Martha’s were all downstairs, he concluded
that she must have callers; for when she was
alone she went up to her own room to read, and just
before nine o’clock Mr. Shelby put out all the lights
of the lower floor. The old gentleman was sensitive
about uselessly high gas bills, in spite of the fact
that he was, himself, to an almost exclusive extent,
the company that produced the gas.</p>

<p class="pindent">In the vestibule at his own door Harlan furled his
umbrella, shook the spray from his waterproof overcoat,
and was groping in his waistcoat pocket for the
latchkey, when his mother unexpectedly opened the
door for him from the inside. “I was standing at
a window looking out, and saw you come up the
walk,” she explained. “Your mackintosh looks
soaking wet; you must be drowned! The doctor
was here again awhile ago and says Lena’s doing
splendidly, and the nurse just told me she and the
baby are both asleep. Come into the library and dry
off. Your father’s gone to bed, but he lit the fire
for you before he went up. We were afraid you’d
be chilled. How did you find mother?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“About the same, I should say.” Harlan hung
his dripping overcoat upon the ponderous walnut
hatrack, the base of which was equipped for
such emergencies with a pair of iron soup plates in
a high state of ornamentation. Then he followed
his mother into the library and went to sit by the
fire, extending his long legs to its warmth, so that
presently the drenched light shoes he wore began to
emit a perceptible vapour.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You ought to have worn your rubbers,” Mrs.
Oliphant said reproachfully; and then as he only
murmured “Oh, no,” in response, she said in a tone
of inquiry: “I suppose you didn’t happen to see
anything of Dan?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Not very likely! Not much to be seen between
here and grandma’s just now except night and
water.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I suppose so,” she assented. “I thought possibly
you might have gone somewhere else after you left
mother’s.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No.” But there had been something a little
perturbed in her voice and he turned to look at her.
“Were you at the window on Dan’s account,
mother? Are you anxious about him?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Not exactly anxious,” she answered. “But—well,
I just thought——” She paused.</p>

<p class="pindent">Harlan laughed. “Don’t be worried about it.
I’ll sit up for him, if you like. I dare say your surmise
is correct.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“My surmise?” she repeated, a little embarrassed.
“What surmise?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“About how your wandering boy has spent his
evening,” Harlan returned lightly. “I haven’t a
doubt you’re right, and he’s followed the good old
custom.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Mrs. Oliphant coloured a little. “I don’t know
what you mean.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, yes, you do!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t,” she protested, with a consciousness of
manner that betrayed how well she understood him
in spite of her denial. “I don’t, indeed!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No?” the amused Harlan said mockingly. “You
don’t know that upon the birth of an heir—especially
when it’s the first and a boy—it’s always
understood by every good citizen of these parts
that it’s the proud father’s business to go out and
celebrate? Don’t worry, mother: Dan won’t go so
far with it that he’ll be unable to get home. Even
in his liveliest times at college he always kept his
head.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’m not exactly worried,” she explained, with a
troubled air. “I know young fathers usually <span class="it">do</span> cut
up a little like that;—the only time in his life when
your father didn’t seem to be quite himself was the
night after Dan was born. I’m afraid he was really
almost a little tight, and I gave him such a talking to
when I was well enough, that he didn’t repeat it
when you came along. But I haven’t been worrying
so much about Dan’s going downtown and celebrating
a little, as you call it—he’s so steady nowadays,
and works so hard I don’t think it would be much
harm—but I thought—I was a little afraid—I——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Afraid of what, mother?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, he was so exhilarated, so excited about his
having a son—he was so much that way before he
went out, I was a little afraid that when he added
stimulants to the tremendous spirits he was already
in, he might do something foolish.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, of course he will,” Harlan assured her
cheerfully. “But it will only amount to some uproariousness
and singing at the club, probably.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I know,” she said. “But I’ve been afraid he’d do
something that would put him in a foolish position.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I shouldn’t have that on my mind if I were you,
mother. There’s hardly ever anybody at the club
in the evening, and the one or two who’d be there
on a night like this certainly wouldn’t be critical!
Besides, they’d <span class="it">expect</span> a little boisterousness from
him, under the circumstances.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I know—I know,” she said, but neither her tone
nor her expression denoted that his reassurances
completely soothed her. On the contrary, her anxiety
seemed to increase;—she had remained near the
open door leading into the hall, and her attitude
was that of one who uneasily awaits an event.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Mother, why don’t you go to bed? I’ll see that
he gets in all right and I won’t let him go near
Lena’s room, if that’s what’s bothering you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It isn’t,” she returned; was silent a moment; then
she said abruptly: “Harlan, would you mind going
over to Martha’s?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Would you mind going over there? You could
make up some excuse; you could say you wanted to
borrow a book or something.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, it’s after half-past ten,” Harlan said, astonished.
“What on earth do you want me to go
over there for, as late as this?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, it’s why I am a little worried,” she explained.
“I’d been standing at the window a long
while before you came, Harlan; and about half an
hour ago I thought I saw Dan and someone else
come along the sidewalk and stop at our gate. At
any rate two men did stop at the gate.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You recognized Dan?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No; it was too dark and raining too hard. I
thought at first perhaps it was you with someone
you knew and had happened to walk along with. I
went to the front door and opened it, but I could
only make out that they seemed to be talking and
gesturing a good deal, and I thought I recognized
your cousin Fred Oliphant’s voice. I waited, with
the door open, but they didn’t come in, and pretty
soon they went on. I called, ‘Dan! Oh, Dan!’
but the wind was blowing so I don’t suppose they
heard me. Then I thought I saw the same two
going up the Shelbys’ walk to the front veranda.
They must have gone in, because a minute or so
afterwards the downstairs windows over there were
lighted up. Couldn’t you make some excuse to go
over and see if it’s Dan?”</p>

<p class="pindent">Harlan jumped up from his chair by the fire.
“It just <span class="it">might</span> be Dan,” he said, frowning. “I
don’t think so, but——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’m <span class="it">so</span> afraid it is!” Mrs. Oliphant exclaimed.
“I don’t like to bother you, and it may be a little
awkward for you, going in so late, but you can
surely think of some reasonable excuse, if it <span class="it">isn’t</span>
Dan. If it is, do get him away as quickly as you
can; I’d be terribly upset to have him make an exhibition
of himself before Martha—she’s always had
such a high opinion of him.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, she has!” Harlan interrupted dryly, as he
strode out into the hall; and he added: “I don’t
suppose Lena’d be <span class="it">too</span> pleased!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“She’d be furious,” his mother lamented in a whisper.
She helped him to put on his wet waterproof
coat, and continued her whisper. “She’s never been
able to like poor Martha, and if she heard he went
there to-night when she’s still so sick, she—she——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, she would!” Harlan said grimly, finishing
the thought for her. “You might as well go to bed
now, mother.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, no,” she said. “If it is Dan, I won’t let
him see me when you get back, but I just want to
know he’s safely in. And try to—try to——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Try to what, mother?” he asked, pausing with
the door open.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Try to explain it a little to Martha. She’s always
been such a good friend of his, and he needs friends.
Try to keep her from losing her high opinion of him.
She’s always——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“She has indeed!” Harlan returned with a wry
smile. “I’ll do what I can.” And he closed the
door behind him as gently as he could, against the
turbulent wind.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XIV</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="dropcap">A</span>DMITTED by a coloured housemaid who
drowsily said, “Yes’m, she still up,” in response
to his inquiry, Harlan had only to
step into the Shelbys’ marble-floored “front hall”
to dispel his slight doubts concerning the identity of
Martha’s callers; his brother was unquestionably one
of them.</p>

<p class="pindent">The heavy doors leading from the hall into the
drawing-room sheltering Mr. Shelby’s Corot were
closed, but Dan’s voice was audible and although
his words were indistinguishable he was evidently
in high spirits and holding forth upon some subject
that required a great deal of emphatic expounding.
Harlan stepped forward to open the doors and go in
but halted abruptly, for at this moment Martha
made her appearance at the other end of the hall.
She came from the rear of the house and carried an
oval silver tray whereon gleamed, among delicate
napery and china, a silver coffee pot of unusually
ample dimensions.</p>

<p class="pindent">Her serious but untroubled look was upon the
tray; then she glanced up, saw Harlan, and in surprise
uttered a vague sound of exclamation. He
went quickly toward her, but before he reached her
she nodded to the housemaid in dismissal. “You
can go to bed now, Emma.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes’m, thank you,” said Emma. “I’m full
ready,” she added, as she disappeared.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I came over because I was afraid you——”
Harlan began.</p>

<p class="pindent">But Martha interrupted him at once. “You
needn’t be,” she said. “There’s nothing the matter.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I only thought their coming here—disturbing
you at this hour——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It doesn’t disturb me,” she said. “It isn’t very
late.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But wouldn’t your father——”</p>

<p class="pindent">At that Martha laughed. “The chandelier in
there fell down one night last winter, and <span class="it">it</span> didn’t
wake him up! At least I do run the house when
he’s asleep. Don’t look so tragic!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But I’m afraid they——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It’s nothing at all, Harlan. I’d gone upstairs,
but not to bed, when the bell rang; and when Emma
told me Dan and Fred Oliphant were here, I came
down and brought them in and lit the fire for them.
They <span class="it">were</span> rather damp!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But why didn’t you——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Send them home? Because Dan wanted to tell
me all about the baby.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Good heavens!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Not at all!” she said; and as his expression still
remained gloomy, she laughed. “Won’t you open
the door for me? I made coffee for them because
I thought it might do them good—especially your
cousin Fred.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Harlan uttered an exclamation of reproach addressed
to himself: “Idiot! To let you stand there
holding that heavy tray!” He would have taken it
from her, but she objected.</p>

<p class="pindent">“No; you might spill something. Just open the
door for me.”</p>

<p class="pindent">He obeyed, then followed her into the drawing-room
and closed the door. Before him, in a damask-covered
armchair, was seated his second cousin, Mr.
Frederic Oliphant, a young gentleman of considerable
pretensions to elegance, especially when he had
spent an evening at the club. In fact, since the installation
of this club, which the well-to-do of the
town had not recognized as a necessary bit of comfort
until recently, Fred had formed the habit of
arriving home every evening with such a complete
set of eighteenth-century manners that there was
no little uneasiness about him in his branch of the
Oliphant family.</p>

<p class="pindent">At present he was leaning forward in his chair, a
hand politely cupped about his ear to give an appearance
of more profound attention to what Dan
was saying. The latter stood at the other end of the
room, before the fire, and with great earnestness addressed
this ardent listener; but Harlan was relieved
to see that although his brother’s eyes were extraordinarily
bright and his cheeks ruddier than usual,
there appeared no other symptoms, except his eloquence,
of his dalliance at the club. “No, and always
no!” he was protesting as the door opened. “If
we lose that, we lose everything! This country——”</p>

<p class="pindent">But here Fred sprang up to take the tray from
Martha. “Permit me! Indeed permit me!” he
begged. “It must not be said of an Oliphant that
he allowed a lady to perform menial——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, no!” She laughed, and evading his assistance,
set the tray upon a table. “Do sit down,
Fred.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Since it is <span class="it">you</span> who command it!” he said gallantly
and returned to his chair; but on the way perceived
the gloomy Harlan and bowed to him. “My
dear sir!” he said. “This is an honour as unexpected
as it is gracious; an honour not only to our
hostess but to——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Sit down!” Harlan said brusquely.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Since it is <span class="it">you</span> who command it!” the other returned
with the happy air of a man who delivers an
entirely novel bit of repartee; then bowed again
and complied.</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan came forward from his place before the fire.
“Why, Harlan!” he exclaimed. “I thought you
went to spend the evening with grandma.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I did,” Harlan returned, and added pointedly:
“Several hours ago!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But it isn’t late, is it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No,” Martha said quickly;—“it isn’t. Won’t
you both please sit down and let me give you some
coffee?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Really——” Harlan began, but she checked him
and had her way; though Dan did not sit down.
Instead, he returned to the fireplace with the coffee
she gave him. “What I was tryin’ to explain to
Fred when you came in,” he said;—“it was something
I don’t think he understood at all, but I believe
<span class="it">you</span> would, Martha.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I beg you; I beg you,” the courtly Frederic
interposed. “I was never gifted, yet I understood
you perfectly. You said, ‘If we lose that, we lose
everything.’ I think you must have been speaking
of champagne.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, no,” Dan said, and for a moment appeared
to be slightly annoyed; then he brightened. “I
told you several times I meant our work for the new
generation. The minute a man gets to be a father
he belongs to the <span class="it">old</span> generation, and the only use he
is, it’s to plan for the new one. From then on,
that’s what his whole life ought to be—just buildin’
up the world for his son. Now you take this boy
o’ mine——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Excuse me,” his cousin interrupted earnestly.
“You’re referring now to the one who was born
late this afternoon?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I mean my <span class="it">boy</span>!” Dan replied; and his face glowed
with the triumphant word. “I have a son! Didn’t
you know it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It’s been mentioned, I believe, during the evening,”
Frederic answered. “Excuse me, pray.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“When he grows up,” Dan went on radiantly,
“he’s got to find everything better because of the
work the old generation’s got to do to make it that
way. That’s what we’re put in the world <span class="it">for</span>! I
never knew what I was for until to-day. I knew I
was meant for <span class="it">something</span>; I knew I ought to be makin’
plans and tryin’ to build <span class="it">up</span>; but I didn’t see just what
for. I thought I did, but I didn’t. That’s what I
wanted to explain to Martha, because she’s the only
one that could understand. It’s the reason for the
universe.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You surprise me,” Frederic remarked; and he replaced
his cup with careful accuracy upon its saucer
on the arm of his chair. “Correct me if I fail to
follow you, but are you fair to your son? If he’s
the reason for the universe he ought to be able to
grasp a few simple truths. You say Martha is the
only person who could understand, but have you
even tried to make <span class="it">him</span> understand?”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan laughed happily, in high good humour.
“That boy’ll understand soon enough!” he cried.
“You wait till he’s old enough for me to drive him
out to Ornaby and let him look it over and see where
his father fought, bled, and died to build it for him!
You wait till he learns to drive an automobile from
his father’s and his uncle’s own factory!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“His uncle’s?” Frederic repeated, turning to Harlan.
“Forgive me if I trespass upon private ground,
but I haven’t heard——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I have nothing to do with it,” Harlan said,
frowning with an annoyance that had been increasing
since his entrance into the room. “He means his
wife’s brother.” He leaned toward Martha, who
sat looking quietly at the radiant Dan. “Did you
ever hear wilder nonsense?” he said in a low voice.
“I really suspect he’s a little mad. Do tell us to
go home.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, no,” she whispered, and returned her attention
instantly to Dan, who was explaining to his
cousin.</p>

<p class="pindent">“My brother-in-law in New York, George McMillan,
wrote me he’d got hold of an engineer who’d
made designs for a wonderful improvement in automobile
engines. McMillan wants to come out here,
and he and I think of goin’ into it together. We
want to build a factory over on the west edge of
Ornaby, where it won’t interfere with the residential
section.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“The residential section?” his cousin repeated in
a tone of gentle inquiry. “Do I comprehend you?
It’s over where you’ve got that tool shed?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“<span class="it">No</span>, sir!” Dan exclaimed triumphantly. “We
moved the tool shed this very morning because
yesterday the lot it stood on was sold. Yes, sir;
Ornaby Addition has begun to exist!”</p>

<p class="pindent">At this Martha’s quiet attitude altered; she leaned
forward and clapped her hands. “Dan! Is it true?
Have you sold some lots?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“The first one,” he answered proudly. “The
very first lot was sold the day before my son was
born!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“How splendid!” she cried. “And they’ll build
on it right away?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No; not right away,” he admitted. “That is,
not much of a house, so to speak. It was bought by
a man that wants to own a small picnic ground of his
own, because he’s got a large family; and at first he’s
only goin’ to have a sort of shack there. But he
<span class="it">will</span> build when he sees the other houses goin’ up
all around him.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Pardon me,” said Frederic Oliphant. “Which
other houses are you mentioning now?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“The houses that <span class="it">will</span> go up there,” Dan returned
promptly. “The houses that’ll be there for my
young son to see.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Your ‘young son?’ ” Fred repeated. “Your son
is still young yet, then? It’s remarkable when you
consider he’s the meaning of the universe. You
feel that when he grows up he’ll have houses to look
at?”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan’s chest expanded with the great breath he
took; his high colour grew higher, his bright eyes
brighter. “Just <span class="it">think</span> what he’ll have to look at
when he grows up! Why, the nurse let me hold him
a few minutes, and I got to thinkin’ about how I’m
goin’ to work for him, and then about how this
country’s moved ahead every minute since it was
begun, goin’ ahead faster and faster till now it just
jumps out from under your feet if you stand still
a <span class="it">second</span>—and it grows so big and it grows so magnificent
that when I thought of what sort of a world
it’s goin to be for my son, I declare I was almost
afraid to look at him; it was like lookin’ at somebody
that’s born to be a god!”</p>

<p class="pindent">He spoke with such honest fervour, and with such
belief in what he said, that, for the moment, even
his bibulous cousin said nothing, but sat in an emotional
silence, staring at him. As for Martha, an
edge of tears suddenly showed along her eyelids;
but Harlan was not so susceptible. “Dear me!”
he said dryly. “After that burst of eloquence don’t
you think we’d better be starting for home? At
least it would avoid an anti-climax.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan had been so rapt in his moment of vision,
his exultant glimpse of a transcendent world for his
son’s heritage, that his brother’s dry voice confused
him;—he was like a balloonist who unexpectedly
finds the earth rising swiftly to meet him. “What?”
he said blankly; and then, as secondary perceptions
clarified Harlan’s suggestion to him, he laughed.
“Why, yes; of course we ought to be goin’; we mustn’t
keep Martha up,” he said. “Harlan, you always
do find a way to make me look mighty ridiculous.
I guess I am, too!”</p>

<p class="pindent">With that, shaking his head and laughing, he
brought his cup and saucer to the tray upon the
table beside Martha, and turned to her. “Good-night,
Martha. I guess I talk like a fool, but you
know it doesn’t happen every day, my gettin’ to be
a father! I want to bring him over to see you the
first time they’ll let him outdoors. I want you to
be his godmother, Martha. I want you to help
bring him up.” She rose, and he took her hand as
he said good-night again; and then, going toward
the door, he added cheerfully, with a complete unconsciousness
that there might be thought something
a little odd about such a speech: “What I hope most
is, I hope he’ll grow up to be like <span class="it">you</span>!”</p>

<p class="pindent">Martha’s colour deepened as she met Harlan’s
gaze for an instant; and she turned quickly to say
good-night to the solemn Frederic, who was bowing
profoundly before her. “Permit me, indeed,” he
murmured, and followed Dan out into the hall.</p>

<p class="pindent">Thus, for a moment, Martha and Harlan were
alone together; and he stepped nearer to her.
“Mother wanted me to apologize for him,” he said.
“I do hope you’ll——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Apologize for him?” she echoed incredulously.
“Why? Don’t you suppose I’m glad he wanted to
come here?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But under the circumstances——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No,” she said proudly. “I’d always be glad—under
any circumstances.”</p>

<p class="pindent">He looked at her, smiled with a melancholy humour
not devoid of some compassion for her, as well as for
himself, and assented in a rueful voice, “I suppose
so!” But, having turned to go, he paused and
asked wistfully: “Are there any circumstances under
which anything <span class="it">I</span> could do would make you glad?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“In some ways, why, of course,” she answered with
a cordiality that did not hearten him; for he sighed,
understanding in what ways he had no power to
make her glad.</p>

<p class="pindent">“All right,” he said, and, straightening his drooped
shoulders, strode out to join his brother and cousin
in the hall.</p>

<p class="pindent">Young Mr. Frederic Oliphant was lost in a
thoughtful silence while the three went down the
path to the gate, but as they passed this portal, his
attention was caught by external circumstances.
“Excuse me if I appear to seek assistance upon
a point of natural history,” he said;—“but wasn’t it
raining or something when we came in here?” And,
being assured that rain had fallen at the time he mentioned,
he went on: “That makes it all the more
remarkable, my not noticing it’s cleared up until
we got all the way out here to the sidewalk. I was
thinking about Dan’s speech.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Never you mind about my ‘speech.’ ” Dan returned
jovially. “You’ll make speeches yourself
if you ever have a son. I could make speeches all
night long! Want to hear me?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Don’t begin till we reach your gate,” Fred said.
“I’m going to leave you and Harlan there and go
back to the club. But when I spoke of your speech
I didn’t mean the one you made over by the fireplace,
the one all about your son’s being the meaning of the
universe and gods and everything. I meant your
last speech—not a speech exactly, but what you said
to Martha.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I didn’t say anything to her except ‘good-night.’ ”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It <span class="it">seemed</span> to me you did,” Fred said apologetically.
“I may be wrong, but it seemed to me you
said something more. Didn’t it seem so to you,
Harlan?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, it did,” Harlan answered briefly. The
group had paused at the Oliphants’ gate, and he
opened it, about to pass within.</p>

<p class="pindent">But his cousin detained him. “Wait a moment,
I mean about Dan’s hoping the baby would grow up
to look like Martha. Didn’t it strike you——”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan laughed. “Oh, that? No; I said something
about hoping he’d grow up to be like her: I meant I
hoped he’d have her qualities.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I see,” young Mr. Oliphant said pensively.
“The only reason it struck me as peculiar was I
thought that was what the father usually said to
the mother.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Thereupon he lifted his hat politely, bowed and
walked away, leaving both of the brothers staring
after him.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XV</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="dropcap">H</span>IS humour was misplaced, and both of them
would have been nothing less than dismayed
could they have foreseen in what
manner he was destined to misplace it again, and
to what damage; for not gossip, nor scandal, nor
slander’s very self can leave a trail more ruinous than
may a merry bit of drollery misplaced. The occasion
of the catastrophe was not immediate, however;
it befell a month later, when the Oliphants
made a celebration to mark the arrival of the baby
and the completed recovery of the baby’s mother.
Mrs. Oliphant gave a “family dinner.”</p>

<p class="pindent">She felt that something in the nature of a mild
banquet was called for, and her interpretation of
“the family” was a liberal one. Except those within
her household, and except her mother, who was
still somehow “hanging on,” she had no relatives
of her own; but the kinsfolk of her husband were
numerous, and she invited them all to meet their
new little kinsman.</p>

<p class="pindent">They were presented to this personage; and then
the jubilant father, carrying him high in his arms
and shouting, led a lively procession into the dining-room.
The baby behaved well, in spite of the noise
his father made, and showed no alarm to be held so
far aloft in the air, even when he was lifted as high
as his bearer’s arms could reach.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Ladies and gentlemen,” Dan shouted, thus interpreting
his offspring’s thoughts in the matter,
“grandparents, great-uncles, great-aunts, uncle Harlan,
second-cousins and third-cousins, kindly sit
down and eat as much as you can. And please remember
I invite you to my christening, one week
from next Sunday; and if you want to know what’s
goin’ to be my name, why, it’s Henry for my grandpa,
and Daniel for my papa, and Oliphant for all of us.
Take a good look at me, because I’m Henry Daniel
Oliphant, ladies and gentlemen, the son and heir to
Ornaby Addition!”</p>

<p class="pindent">There was cheering and applause; then the company
sat down; the nurse took the little lacy white
bundle from the protesting father’s arms; and Henry
Daniel Oliphant was borne away amid the customary
demonstrations, and carried upstairs to his
cradle.</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan, at the head of the table, held forth in the
immemorial manner of young fathers: the baby had
laughed his first laugh that very morning;—Dan was
sure it was neither an illusion of his own nor a chance
configuration of the baby’s features. It was absolutely
an actual human laugh, although at first the astounded
parent hadn’t been able to believe it, because
he’d never heard of any baby’s laughing when it was
only a month old. But when Henry Daniel laughed
not once, but twice, and moreover went on laughing
for certainly as long as thirty-five seconds, the fact
was proven and no longer to be doubted. “No, sir, I
just had to believe my own eyes when he kept right
<span class="it">on</span> laughin’ up at me that way, as if he thought I
was a mighty funny lookin’ old thing to be his
daddy. My, but it does seem like a miracle to
have your son look up at you that way and laugh!
I hope he’ll keep doin’ it his whole life long, too.
I’m certainly goin’ to do all <span class="it">I</span> can to keep him
from ever havin’ anything happen he can’t laugh
at!”</p>

<p class="pindent">He continued, becoming jovially oratorical upon
his theme, while down at the other end of the long
table, sitting between the baby’s grandfather and
grandmother, Lena now and then gave him a half-veiled,
quick glance that a chance observer might
have defined as inscrutable.</p>

<p class="pindent">Her pretty black-and-white dress of fluffy chiffon
was designed with a more revealing coquetry than
the times sanctioned; so that her amiable father-in-law,
though not himself conscious of any disapproval,
withheld from expression his thought that it
was just as well that Mrs. Savage could not be of the
company. The ruthless old lady might have supplemented
her “lesson” to Lena, although it had produced
somewhat pointedly the reverse of its intended
effect. The young mother was “painted” more
dashingly than the bride had been, and her lips as
well as her cheeks were made so vivid that probably
her friends in New York would have found her more
than ever the French doll—a discontented French
doll, they might have said.</p>

<p class="pindent">Yet, to her credit, if she was discontented, she
made an effort not to seem so; she chattered gayly
to her mother-in-law and Mr. Oliphant, laughed
with them about Dan’s bragging of his offspring,
and coquetted demurely with one or two elderly
cousins-in-law. A young one, Mr. Frederic Oliphant,
seemed genuinely to amuse her, which was
what led to misfortune. He found her laughter a
sweet fluting in his ears, and, wishing to hear more
of it, elaborated the solemn-mannered waggeries that
produced it.</p>

<p class="pindent">“It’s a great thing to be the only father in the
world,” he said. “I suppose it’s even greater than
being an earl.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why than an earl particularly?” she asked.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Didn’t you know? At the club and downtown
nowadays they speak of your husband as the ‘Earl
of Ornaby.’ You may not have noticed it, but he
sometimes mentions a place called Ornaby Addition.
Now that he’s got another subject though, I suspect
his title ought to be changed to ‘Father of the Heir
to Ornaby.’ Doesn’t that seem more intriguing, if
I may employ the expression?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Most intriguing!” she agreed. “But since my
husband’s the ‘Earl,’ am I called the ‘Countess of
Ornaby’?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No; they leave you out of it, and I’m afraid
you’ll be left out of it again if the new title’s conferred
on him. No one would get an idea from his
orations that the Heir to Ornaby has a mother. A
father would seem to be Henry Daniel’s sole and total
ancestry.” Then, as she laughed again, Fred added
his unfortunate afterthought. “No; I forgot. I
believe he does include a godmother as a sort of
secondary necessity.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Does he? We haven’t talked about who’s to be
the godmother yet. We haven’t selected one.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“ ‘We?’ ” Fred repeated, affecting surprise. “You
seem to think you have something to do with it!
Perhaps when the father of the Heir to Ornaby gets
around to it, he may condescend to inform you that
the godmother was selected the very night after the
heir was born.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Was she?” Lena laughed. “Where? At the
club?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Goodness, no! Don’t you know where Dan
went that night?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Just to the club, didn’t he?” Lena said cheerfully,
a little surprised. “That’s all I heard mentioned
about it afterwards, at least.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Ah, they cover up these things from you, I see.
It’s time somebody warned you of what’s going on.”
And Fred was inspired to add: “Haven’t you realized
yet there’s an enchantress living right next door to
you?”</p>

<p class="pindent">From the young man’s own point of view, this was
foolery altogether harmless: Martha Shelby was almost
“one of the family”—so near to being one of
them, in fact, that he would not have been at all
surprised to find her included in this family party—and
the episode of his call upon her, with his cousin,
upon the night after the baby’s birth, seemed to him
of no other than a jocose significance. Like Dan’s
“speech” to Martha, it merely illustrated the hare-brained
condition of a new-made father, and in that
light was handy material for a family dinner-table
humorist.</p>

<p class="pindent">In this capacity, therefore, he blundered on.
“Yes, indeed—right next door! Old Dan may <span class="it">look</span>
like the steady, plodding homebody sort of husband,
but when that type really breaks out it’s the wildest
of all.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Lena gave the <span class="it">farceur</span> a sidelong glance the sobriety
of which he failed to perceive; but at once she seemed
to fall in with the spirit of his burlesquing, and, assuming
a mock solemnity herself, “This is terrible
news!” she said. “I suspected him of being rather
wild, but I didn’t suppose he’d go so far as to appoint
an enchantress to be the godmother.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“And not only appointed her, but called on her in
the middle of the night to notify her of the appointment,”
Fred added. “Not only that, but dragged
<span class="it">me</span> along to be a chaperon!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No! Did he? How funny!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“The way he behaved when we got there, I think
he needed one!” the youth continued, expanding in
the warmth of her eagerly responsive laughter.
“We <span class="it">did</span> get oratory! He explained to the enchantress
that she was the only person who could understand
his son’s being a god and the meaning of the
universe; but that wasn’t all. Oh, not by any
means!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But he <span class="it">couldn’t</span> have done worse than that!”
she laughed. “Are you sure?”</p>

<p class="pindent">Fred was so overcome by mirthful recollection
that he was unable to retain his affectation of solemnity;—a
sputtering chuckle escaped him. “I wish
you’d been there to hear him telling Martha he
wanted Henry Daniel to grow up to be like <span class="it">her</span>!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No! Did he?”</p>

<p class="pindent">The jovial Frederic failed to catch the overtone
in her voice, but happening to glance at Harlan, who
sat opposite him, he was surprised, too late, by a
brief pantomime of warning. Harlan frowned and
pointedly shook his head; and at the same time Mrs.
Oliphant, across whom the merry colloquy had taken
place, began hastily to talk to Fred about his health.
His mother had told her that he was ruining it at
the club, she said amiably, and, to his mystification,
became voluble upon the subject; but she also was
too late. Lena continued to laugh, and, turning to
Mr. Oliphant, prattled cheerily about nothing;—but
Harlan saw her covert glance at the other end of the
table where her husband was still bragging of Henry
Daniel; and, although her eyelids quickly descended
upon it, this glance was an evanescent spark glowing
brightly for an instant through the fringe of
blackened lashes.</p>

<p class="pindent">When the party left the table to prepare for the
charades—the customary entertainment offered to
one another by the Oliphants on such occasions—Frederic
sought an opportunity to speak privately
with Harlan.</p>

<p class="pindent">“What on earth were you shaking your head at me
like that for? <span class="it">I</span> wasn’t saying anything.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Weren’t you?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Certainly not! And your mother kept talking
to me as fast as she could all the rest of the time
we were at the table. Looked as if she was afraid
for me to open my mouth again! What was it all
about?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Nothing.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Then what made you act as if it was something?”
Fred inquired. “You certainly don’t think your
sister-in-law would ever be jealous of dear old
<span class="it">Martha</span>, do you?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, no,” Harlan said. “Not jealous. They
don’t get on very well, though, I believe.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What? Why, I passed by here only the other
day and saw Martha coming out of the front door.
She was laughing and waving her hand back to some
one in the doorway and——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, yes. She still comes to see mother sometimes,
as she always did; but I believe she doesn’t
ask for Lena any more when she comes. I understand
Lena has never returned her call. You may
have noticed that ladies regard those things as important?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What of it? Lena would certainly understand.
I’d never have mentioned our going in there that
night, if there’d been any reason for her to mind it,”
Fred protested. “What’s more, she <span class="it">doesn’t</span> mind it.
Look at her now.”</p>

<p class="pindent">He nodded toward where, across the broad drawing-room,
Lena was helping to set the stage for the
first of the charades. She moved with a dancing
step, laughing and chattering to the group about her;
and as she dropped a green velvet table cover over
the back of an armchair, announcing that this drapery
made the chair into a throne, she flung out her
graceful little arms and whirled herself round and
round in an airy pirouette. Fred laughed aloud, finding
himself well-warranted in thinking his cousin’s uneasiness
superfluous; for Lena seemed to be, indeed,
the life of the party. Moreover, she remained in
these high spirits all evening; and Harlan began to
feel reassured, for this was what he and his mother
and father had learned to think of as “Lena’s other
mood”; and sometimes it lasted for several days.</p>

<p class="pindent">The present example of it was not to cover so extensive
a period, however; although when the guests
had gone she kissed her mother-in-law good-night affectionately,
patted Mr. Oliphant’s shoulder, and
then waved a sparkling little hand over the banisters
to Harlan as she skipped upstairs and he stood
below, locking the front doors. Humming “Tell me,
pretty maiden,” from “Floradora,” she disappeared
from his sight in the direction of her own room, but
it was not there she went.</p>

<p class="pindent">Instead, she opened the door beyond hers, stepped
within and closed it;—and during this slight and simple
series of commonplace movements she underwent
a sharp alteration. She had carried her liveliness all
the way to the very doorknob, and, until she touched
it, was still the pirouetting Lena who had been the
life of the party; then suddenly she stood in the
room, haggard; so that what happened to her was
like the necromantic withering of a bright flower
during the mere opening and closing of a door.</p>

<p class="pindent">It was Dan’s room, and he had just taken off his
coat, preparing for bed. “Got to be out at Ornaby
by six to-morrow morning,” he explained. “A contractor’s
goin’ to meet me there to pick out a site for
our automobile works. I won’t get much sleep, I
guess—up at five this morning, too.” He yawned,
and then, laughing, apologized. “I beg your pardon,
Lena; I don’t mean I’m sleepy, if you want to
talk the party over. You were just lovely this evening,
and the whole family thought so, too. You
made it a great success, and you can be certain we
all appreciate it. <span class="it">I</span> certainly do.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Facing him blankly, leaning back against the door
with her hands behind her, she said nothing; and he
stepped toward her solicitously. “I’m afraid you
tired yourself out at it—only a week out of bed, poor
child! You look——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Never mind how I look,” she said in a low voice,
and as his hand was extended placatively, to pet
her, she struck at it. “Just you keep away from
me!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, Lena!” he cried. “What in the world’s
the matter?”</p>

<p class="pindent">She continued to stare at him, not replying, and
he saw that she was trembling slightly from head to
foot. “Lena! You’re lettin’ yourself get all upset
over something or other again. You’ve gone ever
since Henry was born without gettin’ this way. I
was almost in hopes—in hopes——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes?” she said, as he faltered. “What were your
hopes?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, I was almost in hopes it—it wouldn’
happen again.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What wouldn’t happen again?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Your gettin’ upset like this,” he answered apologetically.
“I honestly did pretty near hope it,
Lena. It seemed to me we’d maybe kind of reached
a turning point and could get along all right together,
now Henry’s come to us.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Maybe we <span class="it">have</span> reached a turning point,” she
said. “I suppose it’s generally considered <span class="it">quite</span> a
turning point when a wife leaves her husband for
just cause, isn’t it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, dear me!” Dan sighed, and sat down heavily
on the side of his bed, taking his head between his
hands. “I guess we’ve got to go through another
of ’em.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Another of what?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Another of these troubles,” he sighed. “Well,
what’s this one all about, Lena?”</p>

<p class="pindent">She came toward him angrily. “I’d like to know
what you’d think of any other man that treated his
wife as you do me! What would you say of any
other man who went out the very night his child was
born and did what you did?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, I didn’t do anything,” he said, and looked
up at her, surprised.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You didn’t? Don’t you call it anything to go to
see that woman at midnight?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You mean our goin’ in to Martha’s?” Dan asked,
his surprise increasing. “It wasn’t midnight; it was
about ten o’clock, and we only stayed a few minutes—half
an hour maybe. I just wanted to tell her
about the baby.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, so I hear,” Lena returned bitterly. “You
took particularly good care not to mention that little
call to me afterwards!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No; I didn’t,” he protested. “I never thought
of it; I’ve been too busy thinkin’ about the baby and
Ornaby. I don’t say though”—he paused, and then
went on with painful honesty: “I don’t say I <span class="it">would</span>
have mentioned it to you, if I <span class="it">had</span> thought of it.
I know you’ve never liked Martha. We could all
see that, and it’s been sort of a trouble to us——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“To ‘us’?” she interrupted sharply. “To whom?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, to me, of course; but I mean mother, too,
though she’s never said anything about it. We’ve
all been as fond of Martha all her life as if she was
one of our own family, and, for instance, I think
mother was probably a little worried because she
thought she’d better not invite her to-night, on your
account. What I mean, though, is that I probably
mightn’t have told you about our goin’ in to see her
that night, even if I had thought of it afterwards,
because as I knew how you felt about her I’d have
been afraid of it’s gettin’ you into one of these upsetnesses.
I guess I’d have been right, too,” he
added, with a rueful laugh. “Somebody’s told you
about it, and you <span class="it">have</span> got into one.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“How kind of you! So you admit you went running
to her the minute the baby was born, and yet
you knew perfectly well how I felt about her.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well—I knew how unreasonably you felt about
her.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“ ‘Unreasonably?’ ” Lena cried shrilly. “What a
wise little word! When you told her she was the
only woman in the world who understands you!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, no! <span class="it">I</span> don’t care who understands me,” Dan
protested unhappily. “I meant she was the only
one that would understand what I was sayin’ about
the baby. I just <span class="it">had</span> to talk about him, and she always
understands anything at a time like that—or
any time, for that matter. She——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Go on!” Lena said. “Go on making it worse!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But I’m only tryin’ to explain how——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Explain <span class="it">this</span>, then! You told her you wanted
my child to grow up to be like <span class="it">her</span>.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, yes,” Dan said reasonably. “I didn’t
mean to <span class="it">look</span> like her; I only meant I hoped he’d
have her qualities. Anybody that knows Martha
would feel that way, Lena. Why, except my own
father and mother, she’s the most even-tempered, understanding,
helpful kind of person I ever knew in my
life. Why, everybody in town looks up to her just
the same as I do, and <span class="it">any</span>body’d have said <span class="it">that</span>
to her, Lena. You would yourself, if you had only
not let yourself get prejudiced against her about
nothin’ at all and just been sensible enough to really
get acquainted with her.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Lena stood before him rigidly, except for the
trembling, which had increased a little. “Tell me
another thing,” she said. “When a young wife
becomes a mother, does her husband ever consult
her before inviting a woman she doesn’t like to act
as godmother for the child?”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan got up and began to pace the room, his face
reddening with a prophetic distress. “Oh, golly!”
he groaned. “You’re goin’ to object to it. I see
that now!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You do see it, do you? How remarkable!”</p>

<p class="pindent">He turned to her appealingly. “Look here, Lena;
I <span class="it">did</span> speak about it to her too soon. Of course I
ought to’ve consulted you first;—I was just so enthusiastic
about bein’ the boy’s father, and she’s such
a dear, good, old friend—well, I guess I was excited.
I know I ought to’ve waited and asked you who you
wanted—but I didn’t. I <span class="it">did</span> just blurt out and ask
her, so it’s done and can’t be helped. Well, I can’t
go back on it; I <span class="it">can’t</span> go over there and just plain
tell her you don’t want her!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Can’t you?” Lena said. “It doesn’t matter to
me what you tell her.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You’re not goin’ to make me, are you?” he asked
piteously.</p>

<p class="pindent">“No. Tell her anything you like.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Mistaking this icy permission, he uttered an almost
vociferous sigh of relief. “Well, I do truly
thank you, Lena. If you’re noble enough to overlook
my selfishness in not thinkin’ about who you’d
want to have for Henry’s godmother—well, my goodness,
I <span class="it">am</span> grateful to you, and I know it’s more’n I
deserve. It’s a noble action on your part, and I’m
sure it’s goin’ to lead to splendid results, because
now you can’t help but get better acquainted
with Martha, and you’ll do what I’ve hoped for so
long: you’ll get to likin’ her and thinkin’ as much of
her as everybody else does. With her in that relation——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“In what relation?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“In the relation of the baby’s godmother. From
the very day of the christening you’ll——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“There may not be any such day,” Lena interrupted.
“You seem to have mistaken me. There
may not be any christening—at least not here. If
she’s to be the godmother, the baby and I will be
with my own family in New York.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, golly!” Dan said, and sank down on the side
of the bed again. “Oh, golly!”</p>

<p class="pindent">Lena became vehement. “I should think you
<span class="it">would</span> say ‘golly’! If you had a spark of remorse in
you, I think you’d say more than that!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Remorse? I don’t see——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You don’t?” she cried. “You don’t see what
you have to be remorseful for? You bring me out
here to the life you’ve given me, and you see nothing
to regret? You bring me to this flat town and its
flat people, where not once in months can I hear a
note of real music and where there’s no art and no
beauty and no <span class="it">life</span>—after you’d given me your word
I should have a full year in Europe!—and you watch
me struggling to bear it, to bear it with the best
bravery I have in me, and the most kindness to you—and
to be cheerful—and I <span class="it">dare</span> you to say I haven’t
made the best of it! I <span class="it">have</span>—and how <span class="it">hard</span> I’ve had
to try most of the time to accomplish it! And what
have you been? Who was the man I found I’d
married? Even in this hole of a town he’s called a
failure—the town failure! That’s who you got me
to marry! Even these people out here—your own
people—even they take you as a joke—the town joke!
And when I make the best of it I can and bear it the
best I can, and go on, month after month, not complaining,
and suffer what I suffered when the baby
came, you go gayly over to the woman whose hand
you held the very first day I came here—yes, you
did!—and the woman you’ve compared me to unfavourably
every time you’ve ever dared to speak of
me to her—yes, you have; every single <span class="it">time</span>!—and
you ask her to come and be the godmother to my
child! You can go over there and tell her anything
you like—tell her again you want my baby to be
like her—but there’s one thing you’d better tell her
besides, and that is, there won’t <span class="it">be</span> any christening
if she comes to it!”</p>

<p class="pindent">She ran out, the closing of the door reverberating
eloquently through the house; and Dan remained
seated upon the side of the bed, his head between
his hands. It was by no means the first time he had
remained in that position when Lena slammed the
door.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XVI</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="dropcap">H</span>IS attitude had not changed, fifteen minutes
later, when there came a light tapping upon
that mishandled door of his; and at the
sound he rose quickly, said, “Yes, mother,” and tried
to regain his usual cheerfulness of aspect as Mrs. Oliphant
came in noiselessly. She was smiling, and he
was able to construct a smile in return, telling her
she looked “mighty pretty” in her rose-coloured negligee—a
compliment not exaggerated. Serenity, a good
faith, and a cheerful disposition bring beauty in time
even where it has not been; and, where beauty has
always been, as it had with Mrs. Oliphant, white
hair is only that crowning prettiness so knowingly
sought by the ladies of the eighteenth-century when
they powdered their blonde or brunette ringlets.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I just thought I’d slip in for a minute,” she said
apologetically. “I was afraid you might forget
you had to be up so early to-morrow morning, and
get to thinking about something and not go to bed
at all.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, no; don’t worry. I’ll not do that again,” he
said. “It doesn’t do any good, I know. I suppose
you heard her?”</p>

<p class="pindent">She patted his cheek, smiling up at him and resolutely
withholding from expression the compassion
that had brought her to him. “I just wanted to tell
you not to be troubled. You’ll have to give her a
little more time to get adjusted, Dan. A great
many young couples don’t manage all these little
adjustments until after the first few years of marriage;
and I think my own father and mother didn’t
manage it even that soon;—I’m afraid I remember
their having some rather troubled times when I was
a pretty old little girl. You mustn’t let yourself
be discouraged, dear. Lena really tries to get the
best of herself, and though she fails sometimes——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It isn’t that,” he interrupted. “At least it
seemed to be something more definite than usual
this time. You see, I didn’t stop to think about
consulting her, and asked Martha to be Henry
Daniel’s godmother.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I heard Fred Oliphant say so, but I thought perhaps
he was only trying to tease Lena.” For a moment
Mrs. Oliphant looked disturbed, but brightened
with a quickly reassuring second thought. “Well,
that would be lovely, and I’m glad you did it; but
Martha’ll decline.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“She didn’t, though, when I asked her.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What did she say?”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan rubbed his forehead. “Well, I don’t remember
that she said anything.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No?” His mother laughed. “You won’t have
to withdraw your invitation, if that’s what’s troubling
you, Dan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It <span class="it">is</span> troubling me,” he admitted despondently.
“I just couldn’t go over there and tell her——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No,” Mrs. Oliphant said. “And Martha’d never
let you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You mean <span class="it">you’d</span> tell her——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No. Nobody’ll say a word to her about it.
Don’t you know Martha well enough yet to understand
that she won’t expect to be Henry’s godmother?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But she must.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No. If she did, she’d have spoken of it to me.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“That does look like it a little,” he said with some
relief; then frowned again. “But I <span class="it">want</span> her to be
the godmother; and she <span class="it">ought</span> to be. Lena hasn’t
any great friend of her own that she wants for it;
and Martha’s the best friend I ever——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, no,” his mother interrupted hurriedly.
“It wouldn’t do, Dan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But why?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well——” she hesitated, sighed, and went on:
“We all love Martha—except Lena. I’m afraid
that’s reason enough. You must give it up.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’m afraid so,” he agreed gloomily. “Oh, lordy!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Now, now! Martha knows you wanted her,
and that’s all she’ll care about. She——” Mrs.
Oliphant paused with the bothered air of one who
fears to elaborate an indiscretion already committed.
Then she continued nervously: “There was something
else I wanted to speak to you about. Your
father and I—we’ve been a little afraid——” She
hesitated again.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Afraid of what, mother?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, we were talking over this long struggle of
yours to make a success of the Addition, Dan; and
of course we’ve seen how hard you’ve been pressed
from the very first, and yet you’ve always kept the
thing a little alive and held on to it when time after
time everybody said you’d just have to let go.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, mother?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, it seems your father heard downtown to-day
that <span class="it">this</span> time you’d—you’d——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“This time I’d what, mother?”</p>

<p class="pindent">She put her arms about him and, in spite of her
resolution, the compassion she felt for him was evident
in her voice and in her eyes. “Oh, Dan, if this
time you can’t hold on to it any longer, you mustn’t
feel too badly, please!”</p>

<p class="pindent">He had bent over her as she embraced him; but
now he threw back his shoulders and laughed.
“So that’s what father heard to-day,” he said.
“You tell him he was listening to the wrong crowd,
mother!” He moved her gently toward the door,
his arm about her. “You go to bed, and so will
I.” He laughed again, not grimly or bitterly, but
with deep and hearty mirth. “Why, there isn’t
any more chance of my not keepin’ hold of Ornaby
than there is of this house fallin’ off the earth onto
the moon! They can’t foreclose on me for anyhow
two weeks more, and by that time I’ll show
’em what’s what! I sold a lot only last month,
and there’ve been three more men out there already
to look at locations. Two weeks is plenty
of time for things to happen, mother. Don’t you
worry.”</p>

<p class="pindent">He kissed her good-night, and as she smiled back
at him from the hall and told him she wouldn’t worry
if he’d get some sleep, he went on: “Why, they
haven’t any more chance to get Ornaby away from
me than they have to—than they have to”—he
paused, searching for a sufficient comparison, and,
finding it, finished with cheery explosiveness—“than
they have to get Henry Daniel Oliphant himself
away from me!”</p>

<p class="pindent">Upon this she went to her own door down the hall,
where she nodded and whispered back to him a
smiling good-night, and disappeared, glad to see him
so abundantly recovered from his brief depression.
“Somehow I believe he <span class="it">will</span> manage to keep on going,
even this time,” she told her husband. “He’s so
sure failure’s an absolute impossibility that I do
think maybe——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, I don’t see even a ‘maybe’ in it for him,”
Mr. Oliphant said, and shook his head. “Not <span class="it">this</span>
time, I’m afraid.”</p>

<p class="pindent">But the Earl of Ornaby was in the field by sunrise
the next morning, and armoured in convictions
so strong that he began the day with plans, not for
the retention of the threatened domain, but for an
extension of it; he went to see a farmer who owned
sixty acres north of Ornaby and got an option on
them before keeping his appointment with a contractor
to select a site for the airily projected automobile
factory.</p>

<p class="pindent">Not until the afternoon did he go downtown to see
about raising a little money on a note to fend off the
impending foreclosure; and he was still undiscouraged
when he came home that evening without having succeeded.
There were thirteen long days left, he told
his mother, in the hall near the front door, where she
met him when he came in; and she responded sunnily
that thirteen was a lucky number, then gave him a
note of a kind different from the one he had spent the
afternoon trying to negotiate.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You see I was right,” she said. “Didn’t I tell
you she’d understand? Their housemaid brought
it in this morning after breakfast.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Martha had written to Mrs. Oliphant:</p>

<div class="blockquote100percent">

<p class="pindent"><span style="font-size:smaller">We’re in such a rush of packing I won’t have time to come in
and say good-bye, as I’d like to. Papa has to go to New York,
and I’ve decided I ought to go with him, because there are so
many automobiles there now, and he hasn’t learned that they’re
getting even worse than the bicycle “speeders” about running
over people.</span></p>

<p class="pindent"><span style="font-size:smaller">We’ll be there two or three weeks and I’ve almost persuaded
him to let me show him Quebec and the Saguenay—and he says
he <span class="it">might</span> be willing to take the boat from Montreal for a little
run to England after that!</span></p>

<p class="pindent"><span style="font-size:smaller">Please give my love to Mr. Oliphant and Harlan for me, and
of course to Dan, whom I haven’t seen since his great evening
after the baby was born. He was so funny and delightful, and
he talked with such really true wisdom, too! I wanted to remember
everything he said, but the trouble was that he talked so
fast and said so much that the next day I couldn’t remember any
of it at all!</span></p>

<p class="pindent"><span style="font-size:smaller">Please say good-bye for us to Mrs. Savage. Tell her when we
get home we expect to find her downstairs again and enjoying
the view from that big window of hers where she’s always loved
to sit. Tell her papa wants to come with me to see her. He
wants to talk with her about the old days when this was a little
town. There aren’t so many left now he can do that with,
though I know Mrs. Savage regards him as a mere youth, comparatively!
He asks me to say good-bye to Mr. Oliphant and
all of you for him—and for myself I close with good-bye to <span class="it">you</span>
and send you my best love, always.</span></p>

</div>

<p class="pindent">“Lordy!” Dan said, staring at this missive when
he had finished reading it. “She <span class="it">is</span> goin’ to be gone
a long while! I don’t get to see her often, but it’s
always mighty satisfactory to know she’s <span class="it">there</span>—just
next door. That house’ll look pretty empty for a
while, won’t it?” He sighed. “Well, I suppose I’d
better go and let Lena know there’s nothin’ to disturb
her now about the christening.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Mrs. Oliphant told him lightly that she had already
informed her daughter-in-law of Martha’s departure,
and that it would be better for him not to
mention the subject again;—Lena had selected his
aunt Olive as a proper godmother. Dan looked
rueful, but muttered an unenthusiastic consent
and went into the library to consult his father upon
the best way to raise money in thirteen days.</p>

<p class="pindent">Mr. Oliphant was unable to offer him either the
money itself or practical advice how to get it. “I’m
afraid it looks like pretty hard luck this time, Dan,
old fellow,” he said. “It’s funny a man with as
good a practice as mine can’t ever seem to be able
to lay his hands on a little cash that doesn’t have to
go right out on some old debt. If I just didn’t have
to meet that confounded note I went on for poor
old Tom Vertrees I——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, no,” his son protested;—“I wouldn’t let you,
if you could. My conscience’d trouble me about
what I <span class="it">did</span> let you do for me if I wasn’t so sure you’ll
get paid back with seven per cent. interest as soon as
I begin to get these lots to sellin’ off a little faster.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What about the three men your mother tells
me have been out there looking at lots since you
sold the first one? Couldn’t you offer them a reduction
in the price for a little cash in hand?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I did,” Dan replied. “I did that the first thing
with each of ’em. But one of ’em told a darkey I’ve
got workin’ out there he thought he could get what
he wanted still cheaper after the mortgage is foreclosed;
and I guess maybe the other two thought the
same way about it. I guess that’s the way those
seven people felt that came when I tried to auction
off some lots awhile back.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’m afraid so. I hope you aren’t going to take
it too hard, Dan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Take what too hard, sir?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“There are other things you can go into, my boy.
You’ve shown you’ve got immense energy and perseverance.
They may laugh at you, but you can be
sure they like the grit you’ve shown, and if you <span class="it">do</span>
have to give up the idea——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What idea, sir?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I mean the idea of this Addition,” his father explained.
“If the time’s come when you have to
let it go——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Ornaby?” Dan interrupted with an incredulity
wholly untouched by the facts confronting him.
“Why, you just put any such notion out of your
mind, sir.” And he repeated the extreme comparison
he had made the night before. “Why, I’m not
goin’ to let Ornaby go any more than I am our little
namesake upstairs in his cradle! I’m goin’ to keep
it this time and every time! I’ve got thirteen days
left and I’ll find <span class="it">some</span> way!”</p>

<p class="pindent">He kept Ornaby “this time,” but in spite of his determined
prophecy and all he did to fulfil it, six of
his thirteen days passed and he had not found the
way. Indeed, he did not find the way at all; for it
was found through none of his seeking. On the
seventh of the thirteen days his grandmother sent
for him to come to talk to her in the evening; and
when he sat down beside her and for a moment covered
the ghostly hand on the coverlet with his own,
he told her truthfully that she was looking better.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, a great <span class="it">deal</span> better!” he said. “I guess
you’re goin’ to do what Martha said in her message,
grandma, and get downstairs again before she comes
home.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Do you think so?” she said in a voice a little
stronger than it was when he had last talked with
her. “You think I might fool that doctor after all?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But doesn’t he say you’re better, grandma?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes,” she said, and smiled faintly. “But he
doesn’t think so. Told me this morning I was
better and then came three times during the day!
<span class="it">He</span> doesn’t fool anybody.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But you’re goin’ to get well,” her grandson assured
her. “What I want to know is: When are
you goin’ to let me bring that baby to see you?
Mother says you don’t——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, no,” she interrupted peevishly. “I don’t
want to see any babies.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But, grandma, you’ve never seen any baby
like——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, no!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But you don’t understand what a baby can be
<span class="it">like</span>,” he persisted. “I don’t know I ever thought
much of babies generally, either; but I’ve found out
there’s just as much difference between ’em as there
is between people. Think of this, for instance: one
day I was bendin’ down over him, just lookin’ at
him—and this was before he was even four weeks
old, remember—and all at once he took the notion I
must be kind of funny. He broke right out in a
laugh! He did! It was a real laugh, too, though a
good many people might think I imagined it; because
I’ve asked everybody I know, pretty near, and not
one of ’em said they ever heard of a baby only four
weeks old that could——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Stop!” she protested. “I didn’t send for you to
talk about your baby.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But, grandma, if you’d just let me bring him to
see you——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t want to hear anything about him, and
I’ve only got one thing to say about him myself.
You better not let him listen to his mother when he
learns to talk, or to Harlan either—not if you want
to save him from that affected Eastern way of talking.
You’ve had enough to do with Eastern people,
young man! You take care of yourself and have as
little to do with ’em after this as you can manage.
They may seem mighty fine and highty-tighty, and
let you think it’s a great thing to be <span class="it">in</span> with ’em, but
all they’re after is to get something out of you; and
after they’ve got it, they’ll give you the go-by quick
enough! Now I haven’t got strength enough to
talk very long, and I don’t want to talk any more
about your baby.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“All right,” he said submissively. “What do
you want to talk about, grandma?”</p>

<p class="pindent">She turned her head on the pillow to look at him;
and it seemed to him that her eyes were vague, as if
they found him indistinct;—she frowned plaintively
in an effort to see him more clearly, and was silent
for a time.</p>

<p class="pindent">“It’s Dan, is it?” she said finally.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, yes, grandma,” he answered in surprise.
“We’ve just been talkin’ about the baby, grandma;
and how much better you are and everything.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I know,” she returned with a feeble petulance.
“I know what we’re talking about. I wanted you to
come to-night because I want to tell you something.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, grandma?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It’s this,” she said; then closed her eyes, and when
she opened them, asked again: “Is it Dan?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, yes, of course, grandma! You just
said——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“<span class="it">I</span> know what I said! I wanted to tell you—to
tell you——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, grandma,” he said, and added indulgently,
“Tell me anything you like to.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I wanted to tell you not to mind,” she went on.
“You mustn’t mind anything that happens. I mean
anything I have to do with.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No; of course,” he returned without any idea of
what she might mean. “Of course I won’t. I won’t
mind it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You must be <span class="it">sure</span> not to,” she insisted. “You
won’t understand, but you mustn’t let it make you
feel hurt with me. You mustn’t——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Of course I won’t. Why, I’d never dream of
feelin’ hurt with you about anything in the world,
grandma.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Listen, Dan. I’ve always liked you best since
you were a little boy. If you don’t understand
something that happens, you remember I said this,
will you? What may happen is for your own good
and to help you, though it may seem just the other
way to you. Will you promise to remember?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Of course,” he returned promptly; but she was
not satisfied.</p>

<p class="pindent">“No; I want you to think what you’re saying.
You speak too quickly to make me sure you’ll remember.
Say it slower, Dan. Say, ‘I promise
to remember.’ ”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I promise to remember,” he repeated slowly, to
indulge this whim of hers; and then asked, “To remember
what, grandma?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What I’ve just told you. That’s all I have to
say, Dan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“All right, grandma;—I hope I haven’t stayed long
enough to tire you,” he said, and patted her hand
as he rose. “I expect you want to drowse a little
now. Good-night, grandma.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Good-bye,” she said. And her cold and bent fingers
feebly clasped his hand, giving it an impulse
which he allowed it to follow until he found it resting
against her cheek. “Dear boy!” she said faintly; and
he was touched by this, the first caress she had given
him since he was a child. She retained his hand,
keeping it against her cheek a moment longer; then
relinquished it gently and said “Good-bye” again.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Not ‘good-bye,’ grandma,” he protested heartily.
“ ‘Good-night,’ not ‘good-bye.’ You <span class="it">are</span> better, and
the doctor himself says so. Why, by next week——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Next week?” she said in the faintest voice in the
world and with the remotest shadow of an elfin
smile to herself. “Next week? Yes. You can—you
can bring the baby to see me—next week.”</p>

<p class="pindent">She just reached the end of that permission, her
voice was so infinitely small and so drowsy; and her
eyes closed before the last word;—she seemed to fall
asleep even while she spoke. Dan tiptoed out, nodding
to the nurse, who had been close at hand in the
hall and came into the room as he left it.</p>

<p class="pindent">Downstairs he found the courteous Nimbus waiting,
as always, to unlatch the front door. But to-night
the elderly servitor was solemn and unloquacious
beyond his custom. “Goo’-ni’, suh,” he said.
“I reckon you’ grammaw ’bout ready to let that big
door swing. Yes, suh. Goo’-ni’, suh.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan walked home, wondering what door Nimbus
conceived himself to be talking about, and wondering
more what his grandmother had meant him to remember.
But at his own door he was abruptly enlightened
upon Nimbus’s meaning about a “big” one.
Harlan met him there and told him that the nurse
had just telephoned.</p>

<p class="pindent">Mrs. Savage would never explain what she had
asked him to remember; she would never explain
anything—never, forever.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XVII</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="dropcap">T</span>HE day after her funeral Mr. Oliphant
brought home a copy of her will and read it
to his wife and their sons and daughter-in-law
in the library. He read slowly, while his four
auditors sat in a silence broken only once, though the
document was a long one. The single interruption
was a vocal sound from Dan when the bequest to
himself was mentioned, an exclamation the import
of which was not determinable by the others.</p>

<p class="pindent">But before the reading Mr. Oliphant made some
introductory remarks as he wiped his glasses: The
estate appeared to be “somewhat larger than anticipated,”
he said, as Mrs. Savage’s boxes in the
bank’s deposit vaults contained securities she had
never mentioned;—she had always been “very reticent
in such matters.” The value of her possessions
might be “estimated roughly at probably upward
of eight hundred thousand dollars, in addition to her
house and a small amount of other real estate.”
Then he took up the typewritten sheets of the will.</p>

<p class="pindent">Mrs. Savage had always been known in the town
as “pretty close”; for her early youth was of the “old-settler”
days when people who failed to be thrifty
might also fail to keep themselves alive; and something
of this quality had the air of striving to survive
her in the posthumous expression of her wishes.
She had left one hundred and thirty-five dollars to
each of her three elderly servants; and seven hundred
and fifty dollars to every “established charitable
institution of worth and merit” in the city, the
“worth and merit” to be determined by her executors,
those two discreet men of substance, Mr.
George Rowe and Mr. John P. Johns.</p>

<p class="pindent">Mr. Oliphant’s throat seemed to trouble him
when he came to the next clause, for he read it huskily,
the papers trembling slightly in his hand. The
paragraph concerned Mrs. Savage’s “dearly and
well-beloved grandson, Daniel Oliphant” and carefully
explained her reasons for making what might
seem an unfair division of her property.</p>

<div class="blockquote100percent">

<p class="pindent"><span style="font-size:smaller">Inasmuch as my said grandson, Daniel, has not seen fit to
avail himself of the sound advice of those more experienced, and
in particular has acted directly contrary to my own counsel for
his well-being, both in the conduct of his business and in other
affairs, wherein I have endeavoured to assist him and offer him
guidance, and although I intend this clause in no manner to reflect
upon or in any way impugn his probity and honour, which
have always been above reproach, I am compelled to draw the
conclusion that he has not shown that discretion in the management
of his affairs which would convince me that in his hands
any large sum or parcel of my estate might not soon be dispersed
and disappear without profit to himself. Therefore, out of regard
to his welfare, as well as to my own peace of mind, and as a
token only of the sincere affection I bear him, I devise and bequeath
to my said grandson, Daniel Oliphant, to be paid to him
in cash by my executors out of the sum remaining on deposit to
my credit at the First National Bank of this city after my funeral
expenses and other just debts and the above mentioned bequests
shall have been paid, the sum of thirty-five hundred dollars.</span></p>

</div>

<p class="pindent">It was then that the indeterminable vocal sound
came from the corner where Dan sat—a sound not
unlike a slight, irrepressible gasp, though not distinctly
that; nor was the nature of the emotion producing
it indicated by the sound itself. No one
looked at Dan, and his father hastily went on with
the reading.</p>

<p class="pindent">To Mrs. Oliphant her mother had left the income to
be derived from “securities to the value of two
hundred and twenty-five thousand dollars, these securities
to be held in trust for her.” Mrs. Oliphant
was to have the income from them during her life,
but she could not sell them or give them away,
though she was left at liberty to bequeath them to
whom she pleased. And the rest of the estate,
much the greater part of it, was left without condition—and
also without defining him as “dearly
and well-beloved”—to her grandson, Harlan, the
residuary legatee.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Good Lord!” Harlan said loudly, and, without
further explanation of his feelings, sat staring blankly
at the wall opposite him.</p>

<p class="pindent">Wiping her eyes, Mrs. Oliphant looked at Dan;
and her husband also turned in that direction.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Dan, old fellow,” he began, in a distressed voice,
“you mustn’t think——”</p>

<p class="pindent">But Lena interrupted him. She jumped up from
her chair, and her cheeks and temples were alive
with a colour that outdid all the extraneous tinting
her grandmother-in-law had so hated. “This is
aimed at <span class="it">me</span>!” she cried. “I understand perfectly
the real meaning of that precious document! Heaven
knows why, but she must have disliked me before
Dan ever brought me here! She showed spite at her
first sight of me, and tried to hurt me, and did hurt
me. And now she cuts us off with nothing and gives
it all to Harlan just to show she thought that all
I care about is money—yes, and to prove she can
still injure me and insult me even after she’s dead!”</p>

<p class="pindent">But here the hot little voice was choked with
anger and tears;—she ran to the door. “What <span class="it">are</span>
such people?” she sobbed, stopping there for a
moment, and addressing to the upper air of the
room this inquiry of passionate wonderment. “Oh,
my heavens! What <span class="it">are</span> these people I’ve got to spend
my life among?”</p>

<p class="pindent">Then she ran through the hall and up the stairs,
sobbing more and more uncontrollably, and audible
below until the vigorous action of her splendidly
constructed bedroom door produced a sonorous climax,
followed by instantaneous silence. Dan had
risen, apparently intending to follow her, but he
paused as his father spoke to him.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I believe I wouldn’t, if I were you, Dan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Wouldn’t what, sir?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I think I’d just let her alone to have it out with
herself. I’ve noticed it seems to work better, she
gets herself in hand sooner that way.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, sir,” Dan said, and moved to depart.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Wait just a minute. I think your mother has
something she wants to say to you.” Mrs. Oliphant,
who was holding her handkerchief to her eyes, had
made a slight gesture, which her husband thus interpreted,
and Dan turned back quickly and stood
before her.</p>

<p class="pindent">“What is it, mother?”</p>

<p class="pindent">She caught his hand and held it, speaking brokenly:</p>

<p class="pindent">“You—you mustn’t think——Mother loved you—she
<span class="it">did</span>! She—she left it so that <span class="it">I</span> could always—always
take care of you, if you—if you needed it.
She didn’t mean anything unkind to you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Mr. Oliphant supplemented this. “I believe your
mother’s entirely right, Dan. The division may
seem unfair, but I’m strongly of the opinion there
was no intention to be unkind or to—or to hurt
you!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“ ‘<span class="it">Hurt</span> me!’ ” Dan exclaimed loudly. His face
was aglow and his eyes were shining. “Hurt me?
Why, she didn’t leave <span class="it">you</span> anything, sir, and you’re
not hurt. And just look what she’s done for me!
Why, even you and mother had begun to think I
couldn’t hold on to Ornaby this time, but grandma’s
left me not only enough to tide me over, but to go
<span class="it">ahead</span> with! I’m goin’ to set out the stakes for that
automobile factory to-morrow!”</p>

<p class="pindent">He turned again toward the door as he spoke;
and his father again mistook his intention. “Dan,
I—I really wouldn’t go up to talk to Lena just now.
If we all just let her alone when she’s in one of these—ah—that
is, I’ve noticed if we keep away——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, so have I,” Dan agreed heartily. “That’s
not where I’m headed for, sir.”</p>

<p class="pindent">His mother had retained his hand in spite of his
movement to go, and now she tried to draw him
nearer her. “Stay with us, dear,” she pleaded.
“You’re so plucky, you poor boy, but I know it <span class="it">has</span>
hurt you. I know you want to get outdoors and
walk and walk and grieve to yourself, but if you’d
stay with your father and me——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I can’t,” he said, and detached his hand from hers
though she still sought to keep it. “I <span class="it">got</span> to go,
mother.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But where?” she begged. “Where do you want
to go at such a time as this, dear?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Where?” he cried triumphantly. “Why, to see
those executors and get that money! I’m goin’ to
make George Rowe and old John P. Johns agree to
advance it to me the first thing to-morrow morning.
Grandma’s saved Ornaby for me, God bless her!”</p>

<p class="pindent">He waved an exultant hand over his head and departed
at a long and rapid stride, leaving his father
and mother to stare at one another with pathetic
inquiry; but after a moment or two of this Mr. Oliphant
laughed vaguely, sighed, shook his head, and
said: “Why, he <span class="it">means</span> it!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You don’t think he’s just covering up what he
feels? Pretending——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Pretending? No!” her husband returned. “All
your mother’s will means to him is that he can go on
with his Addition!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But he can’t. Thirty-five hundred dollars
won’t——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, not long,” Mr. Oliphant admitted. “But it
looks like a million to him to-day, because it pulls
him around this particular corner. Of course in a
little while there’ll be another corner that he <span class="it">can’t</span>
get pulled around, but he doesn’t see that one now.
All he’s thinking about——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But he expects to begin a <span class="it">factory</span>!” she exclaimed.
“I haven’t a doubt he’ll try to.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Neither have I; and that’ll bring the corner he
can’t turn just so much nearer.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It seems so pitiful,” the mother lamented. “I’ll
help him all I can. There’s the income of what
she’s given me——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It won’t go very far,” Oliphant informed her,
ruefully amused. “Not with the kind of plans
Dan’ll be making now that he’s got hold of thirty-five
hundred dollars!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, but then,” she said brightly, yet with a
little timidity, “you see, there’s Harlan. Harlan
could——” She hesitated; and both of them turned,
though not confidently, toward their younger son
who still continued to sit motionless in his chair, in
the bay window, staring at the opposite wall. He
seemed unaware that they were looking at him,
until his mother addressed him directly. “Harlan,
you <span class="it">would</span>, wouldn’t you?”</p>

<p class="pindent">He merged from his deep interior of thought like
a man blinking in the sun after exploring a cavern.
“What?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I said, wouldn’t you——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, yes,” he interrupted. “Yes, I heard what
you said, though I was thinking of something else.
I wonder if either of you understand just what
grandma was up to.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It seems to be plain enough,” his father said.
“She’d always been a pretty sharp business woman;
she was convinced that your grandfather’s success
was mainly due to her advice, and I expect it was,
myself—anyhow a good deal of it—so she thought
Dan ought to’ve listened to her when she opposed
his putting what your grandfather left him and all
he could borrow besides into this real-estate venture.
I’m afraid she felt rather bitter when he went ahead
with it in spite of all she said against it. So it
seems pretty clear that she thought if she left him
anything substantial it would all be thrown away
on a scheme she thinks is bound to fail—she couldn’t
imagine the city’s ever growing out that far—and
she didn’t want her money wasted. So she left it
to you. I don’t see anything particularly enigmatic
about it, Harlan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No,” Harlan agreed, though his dry smile was
evidence that he withheld his true thought on the
matter; “I suppose not. At least, there’s nothing
enigmatic about it to me.” He was obviously not
elated over his good fortune; and his mother saw fit
to commend him for this.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I think—I think it’s so sweet of you, dear,” she
said timidly;—“I mean especially while Dan was here—your
not showing any pleasure in having so much
come to you. I think it’s noble, Harlan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You do?” he asked, and he laughed briefly without
any merriment. “Perhaps I’d better explain
what I believe grandma really meant. She never
liked me, and she always adored Dan. It’s curious,
too, because Dan’s disposition is like grandfather’s,
and she certainly never seemed to think much of
grandfather! Well, she did hate Dan’s throwing his
money away on a wild scheme that can’t possibly do
anything in the end but leave him bankrupt; and
she certainly understood him—she knew no matter
how much he could lay his hands on, he’d pour it
all in after the rest—and it’s true she didn’t want her
money wasted that way, and knew I wouldn’t let it
be wasted at all, if she left it to me; but that wasn’t
what she really had in mind. Lord, no!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Wasn’t it?” his father inquired gravely. “I
don’t see anything else.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Harlan laughed again with the same dry brevity.
“She always hoped Dan would marry Martha
Shelby—and she kept on hoping it, even after he
married Lena.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Harlan!” his mother protested. “You oughtn’t
to speak like that! Why, mother couldn’t any more
have thought of such a thing, when Dan was already
married——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“She died hoping it,” Harlan insisted. “I tell
you——”</p>

<p class="pindent">Mr. Oliphant interrupted. “That seems to me
about as far-fetched an idea as I’ve often heard,
Harlan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Does it, sir? Didn’t you ever hear grandmother
express her opinion of Lena?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Somewhat frequently.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Did you ever hear her mention her conviction
that Lena was entirely mercenary and married Dan
because she thought he was rich?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“She talked that way sometimes—yes.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“And didn’t Lena just show us she thinks that’s
what the will means, herself?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Possibly,” Mr. Oliphant admitted. “But that
doesn’t prove——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You might just read over that document of
grandma’s again,” Harlan suggested. “She appears
to leave me everything and Dan nothing, but gives
mother a very comfortable living income, and she
knew mother will take care of him when he needs it.
What’s most significant, she provides that mother
can leave the principal to any one she pleases. Don’t
you suppose grandma knew it will naturally come to
Dan eventually? She’s really taken care of him,
and at the same time made it appear that he’s cut
off with this thirty-five hundred dollars that’ll last
him about a minute. She did it because she hoped
Lena would leave him and get a divorce.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, no!” Mrs. Oliphant cried out. “Mother
wouldn’t have had such a wicked thought. She
had the strictest ideas about morality I ever——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, she did,” Harlan agreed. “Yet that’s just
what she planned. You may not see it, but it’s as
plain to me as if she had written it in her will. And
there’s something more than that in it, too.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What is it?” Mr. Oliphant inquired skeptically.
“What is the something more that’s hidden from
every eye but yours?”</p>

<p class="pindent">Harlan reddened and failed to reply at once;—then
he said with a reluctant humour: “I’m afraid
she’s played it rather low down on me, sir.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What!” Mr. Oliphant stared at him. “You call
leaving you five or six hundred thousand dollars
playing it rather low down?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You’d say it’s a fantastic view, would you, sir?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, I believe I should—considerably!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Maybe so,” Harlan said. “Yet there seems some
ground for it. Grandma knew—that is, I mean she
thought—she thought that I had certain hopes
about Martha myself, and she told me pretty plainly
I’d better keep out of the way. Well, she’s put me
in a fine light before Martha, hasn’t she? Here’s
Dan, all his life supposed to be the favourite, with
great expectations, and now he’s cut off with a
shilling, and I get it all! In the eyes of a sympathetic
woman who’s always liked him best anyhow, isn’t
he the suffering hero, and don’t I play the rôle of the
brother that undermined him and supplanted him?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“That’s nonsense,” his father said a little irritably.
“You don’t suppose your grandmother deliberately——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t suppose she meant unkindly by me,”
Harlan interrupted. “Naturally I don’t suppose
my grandmother made me her residuary legatee for
the purpose of injuring me. Probably she thought
I’d be consoled by what she was leaving me.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, Harlan!” his mother cried reproachfully.</p>

<p class="pindent">But Harlan only smiled at her faintly and did not
defend himself.</p>

<p class="pindent">“So Lena will leave Dan now, will she?” Mr.
Oliphant inquired, with satire. “And then Dan
will proceed in freedom to carry out the rest of this
programme?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, sir; not at all.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But haven’t you just been saying——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’ve been saying what I see in the will,” Harlan
explained. “I’ve been saying what grandma hoped,
and I think she was pretty shrewd, but I believe that
her dislike of Lena led her into an error. I haven’t
the remotest idea that Lena will leave her husband.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I see!” Mr. Oliphant returned sharply. “You
mean you haven’t any fantastic ideas yourself, Harlan;
it’s only your grandmother who had them,
though she’s just left you a fortune!”</p>

<p class="pindent">His tone was hard; and Harlan, looking at him
gravely, pointed out a significance in the hardness.
“There it is, sir. Already I’m a little more unpopular
with you than usual, because you can’t help
sympathizing with Dan and feeling that I’ve got
his share as well as my own. Don’t you think other
people may feel the same way?”</p>

<p class="pindent">For a moment Mr. Oliphant looked slightly disconcerted
by this bit of analysis, but, recovering himself,
“Not necessarily,” he replied. “I’m not criticizing
you because of your inheritance, but because it doesn’t
seem fair in you to impute all this surreptitious planning
to a person who’s shown such generosity to you.
You don’t seem to realize——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, but I do,” Harlan interrupted. “Mother
spoke of my not seeming elated and praised me for it.
I don’t deserve her praise. You see, if I don’t feel
much elated just at first it’s because to my mind the
whole thing is another example of how much better
grandma liked Dan and how much better other people
are going to go on liking him. Naturally, I’m glad to
have the money; I know she meant well by me, and
I appreciate it. I appreciate another thing, too.
One of the reasons she left it to me was that she knew
I put what I had from grandfather into the safest
type of municipal bonds. She knew that I’d understand
the value of whatever she left me. She knew
I’d take care of it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">He put a slight but sharp and dry emphasis upon
the final words, “She knew I’d take care of it,” so
that there was a hint of warning in them; and he
added, making this note more definite: “She was
right about that, because I <span class="it">will</span> take care of it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Upon that, he struck both arms of his chair decisively
with the palms of his hands, and, as a continuation
of this action, rose and turned to the
window, his back to his parents. They glanced nervously
at each other, each knowing that the other had
the same hope and the same doubt; the glance they
exchanged meaning, “<span class="it">You</span> speak to him about it!”
Mr. Oliphant yielded and coughed uncomfortably as
a prelude, but his wife impulsively decided to begin
the task for him.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Harlan, dear,” she said, “your father and I both
know you’ve always acted conscientiously in everything
you’ve ever done; and of course what mother’s
given you ought to be regarded as a sacred trust.
You’re right to say you’ll take care if it, but we feel—I
mean your father and I feel——” She faltered,
and appealed to her husband: “You <span class="it">do</span> feel that
perhaps—perhaps under the circumstances—perhaps——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes,” Mr. Oliphant said as she came to a helpless
stop;—“I think under the circumstances Harlan
might—might properly see fit to——” But here he,
too, hesitated and seemed unable to continue.</p>

<p class="pindent">Their son, however, understood them perfectly,
and turned sharply to face them. “Of course I
knew you’d ask it,” he said, and an old bitterness,
long held down within him, came to the surface.
“I knew you wanted me to let Dan have even that
twenty-five thousand dollars grandfather left me.
You really wanted me to let him throw it away along
with his own, though you never spoke out and
asked me to do it. Martha Shelby did, though.
<span class="it">She</span> spoke out plainly enough! The fact that grandfather
gave it to me never entered her head. She
only thought I was miserly for not putting it into
Dan’s hands to be squandered. That’s what she
thought, and I’ve understood all along that my
mother and my father had a great deal the same
feeling.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, no,” his mother protested, for the bitterness
in his voice had increased as he spoke. “We never
reproached you, dear.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, not in words maybe.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, not in any way,” she said. “It was right
of you to take care of it, and you’d be right now to
take care of what you’ll have. Your father and I
only mean that now you have so <span class="it">much</span>——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Now that I have so <span class="it">much</span>,” Harlan echoed, “I
ought to throw away part of it, even though grandma’s
trusted me to save it from just this very wastage
and to take care of every bit of it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, no; it isn’t that,” Mrs. Oliphant said; and
with pathetically naïve artfulness she changed the
basis of her appeal. “But you know, dear, you were
just telling us how much Martha had wanted you to
help Dan—she’s always been such a devoted friend
of his—and you said that after she hears about mother’s
bequest to you, she may take it as a kind of
supplanting your brother, and it would be harder
than ever for you to make her fond of you; so don’t
you see—don’t you see what a splendid effect it
would have on her now, when you’ve got so much,
dear, and could spare it—don’t you see, if you’d—if
you’d——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, I see,” Harlan said grimly. “You think
Martha might even admire me enough to marry me,
if I’d say to Dan: ‘Here! I won’t accept all this
that should have been yours. Here’s half of it.’ ”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, no,” she cried, “I didn’t mean half of it;
I only meant you might——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No,” Harlan said; “not <span class="it">any</span>, mother—not a dime!
I won’t impress Martha with a pose. I don’t want
her or anybody else to like me because of a pose.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Would it be a pose,” Mr. Oliphant asked gravely,
“to help your brother?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Wouldn’t it?” Harlan returned as gravely.
“Isn’t it a pose to do something that isn’t natural
to you, simply to make a woman admire you? I’d
call that a pose, myself, though you may have another
definition of the word. I’m not caring to get
admiration that way, sir.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“All right,” his father said, nodding, as the fragile
edifice of Mrs. Oliphant’s gentle cunning was thus
dispersed upon the air. “I should say you had the
right spirit there. But why need it be an attitude?
Wouldn’t you really <span class="it">like</span> to help Dan out a little,
Harlan?”</p>

<p class="pindent">Harlan sighed. “Not in a failure, sir. First
and last he’s had a pretty long chance to prove what
he could do with his Addition, and he’s no nearer
succeeding to-day than he was when he began. Instead,
he’s lost all his money and all his time. All
he’s done was to spoil a farm.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But if he had some really substantial assistance,
it’s not absolutely impossible he might——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, sir,” Harlan said definitely; “I don’t believe
in it, and I’ll never do it. I didn’t want to supplant
him. I didn’t ask for what grandma’s done for me;
I never did one thing to get it, or for the purpose of
making her like me; and, as a matter of fact, she
didn’t do it because she liked me. But she did know
I’d take care of it, and I’m going to prove she was
right about that, anyhow. I won’t throw any of it
away on an attitude to make Martha Shelby think
well of me. Of course she’ll be all the surer she’s
right about me, now that I don’t do anything for
him, though I have so <span class="it">much</span>!” He picked up the
copy of Mrs. Savage’s will from the table where his
father had left it, and, sitting down again, prepared to
look over it; but, as he placed in position the eye-glasses
already necessary to him when he read, he
sent a sidelong glance toward his parents, a glance
in which there was the bitterness of an ancient pain.
“I wouldn’t even throw any of it away to make my
father and mother like me a little better, either,” he
said.</p>

<p class="pindent">Mrs. Oliphant cried out reproachfully: “Oh, Harlan!”
and she would have said more; but her husband
shook his head at her, and she was silent. Harlan
finished his reading, set the manuscript down upon
the table, and went away without speaking again,
so that his parents were left to themselves and a
thoughtful, somewhat melancholy silence.</p>

<p class="pindent">Mrs. Oliphant broke it diffidently. “You don’t
think mother ever dreamed that——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“That he might help Dan? No; not with the
Addition. Harlan’s right when he says that’s just
what she trusted him not to do.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I didn’t mean that,” Mrs. Oliphant explained.
“I mean—you know what he said about mother’s
hoping—I mean his saying he thought mother had
those wild ideas about Lena’s going away and—and
Martha Shelby——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No,” her husband said. “No; I don’t think so.
It seems unlikely. I don’t think your mother would
have——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No,” Mrs. Oliphant assented thoughtfully. “I
can’t believe she would. Of course there isn’t any
way of being sure—now.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No; but it’s probably just Harlan’s imagination.
He’s sensitive, and that always means imaginative,
too. I don’t think we need to dwell on it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I suppose not. Especially as she <span class="it">couldn’t</span> have
meant anything like that. You don’t think she
<span class="it">could</span>, do you, dear?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, no; I don’t think so,” he answered. “We’d
better be worrying over other matters, I suspect.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You mean about getting Harlan to help Dan
out?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Of course I can do something,” she said. “I’ll
help all I can with the income mother’s given me;
we’ve always managed to live very comfortably
without it. But Harlan—why, I almost believe
Dan could make a success of the Addition, if Harlan
would do something substantial about it. Yes; we
ought to be able to think of <span class="it">some</span> way to get him to
do it.”</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XVIII</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="dropcap">T</span>HEY thought of many ways to get him to do
it, but none of such ingenuity as to inspire
them with confidence. Mrs. Oliphant made
more suggestions than her husband did, and she
put most of them into the form of little dramatic
dialogues imagined as taking place between Mr.
Oliphant and Harlan. Mr. Oliphant was to say such-and-such
things to Harlan, who would necessarily
reply in certain terms, which she sketched;—whereupon
his father could triumphantly turn the words
just uttered into proof that Harlan would not only
be doing his duty by helping Dan, but at the same
time would make great headway with Martha
Shelby in a straightforward manner involving not
the slightest pose.</p>

<p class="pindent">Unfortunately, after each of these small dramas in
turn, becoming eager in her opinion that “<span class="it">this</span> time”
she had “got it,” she was forced into pessimism by
Mr. Oliphant’s pointing out that Harlan wouldn’t
say what she had sketched for him; but, on the contrary,
was certain to express himself to an effect
precisely the opposite.</p>

<p class="pindent">Many times that afternoon the poor lady murmured,
“No, I suppose perhaps it wouldn’t do after
all,” and pondered again. “But why don’t you
think of a way that <span class="it">would</span> do?” she asked, with
more spirit, after one of her failures. “You’re a
lawyer; you ought to be able to think of <span class="it">something</span>.”</p>

<p class="pindent">He laughed and made the gesture of a man helpless
between opposing viewpoints of his own. “What
provokes me is that I can’t help seeing Harlan’s side
of it, too. There’s a good deal to be said on his side,
you know.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, indeed,” she readily assented. “He thinks
he’s perfectly right; but of course he isn’t.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, why isn’t he? After all, your mother
trusted him to do just what we’re planning to get
him not to do.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But her will doesn’t <span class="it">say</span> he can’t help Dan. So
why shouldn’t he?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No,” Mr. Oliphant interrupted; “it doesn’t say
he mustn’t; but that’s what she counted on. In our
hearts we’re blaming him for not betraying a trust,
and for being unwilling to put money into the fire;—he
honestly believes it would be putting it into the
fire. And he won’t do it, even though he knows his
refusing makes him look mean in the eyes of pretty
much everybody he cares about, even in the eyes of
the person he seems to care most about. Well,
there’s something rather fine in a stand like that,
after all.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Martha’d never forgive him!” Mrs. Oliphant
said emphatically. “Never! If he doesn’t help
Dan, now that he’s got so <span class="it">much</span>, she’d always believe
him terribly stingy. So you see we ought to persuade
him for his own good, too—if we could only
think of a way.”</p>

<p class="pindent">But they continued to find that elusive way beset
by baffling afterthoughts; and when Dan came home
from his excursion, successful and in high fettle, they
spoke to him of the subject that had been engrossing
them—and were straightway baffled again. Dan
even declined the proffer of future assistance from
his mother.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Not a penny!” he said. “She didn’t have any
faith in me, and she despised the whole idea of
Ornaby. She gave me thirty-five hundred dollars
of my own—bless her for it! She gave me that to
do with as I please, and it’s plenty. Why, to-morrow
I’m goin’ to fix up the interest on what’s
owed on the land, and then I’ve got to settle another
little matter, and after that I——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Wait, Dan,” his father interposed. “What
other little matter is it you have to settle? I didn’t
know anything had been worrying you except the
probable foreclosure.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It didn’t, sir. I didn’t worry about this at all.
I knew I could fix <span class="it">it</span> all right, if I could just hold off
the foreclosure. It seems I’ve never paid any of
the taxes on the Addition—I’ve had so many other
things on my mind, it seems I just kind of neglected
that—and so somebody’s got a tax title to it; but
now I can settle with him to-morrow morning and
clear it off—and then I’m goin’ to turn up some sod
out there! I’m goin’ to get ready to lay the foundation
for my first factory!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But the <span class="it">money</span>, dear!” his mother cried. “How
in the world do you expect even to lay the foundations
unless we can get Harlan——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, ma’am! I wouldn’t take a nickel of it if he
begged me to! I’ve been pretty near where I was
ready to steal to get money to pull me out of a hole;
but I’ll never take one single cent of what grandma
left Harlan, or of what she left you either. If she’d
meant me to have it she’d have given it to me herself;
but she didn’t have any faith in me, and she
says so in plain words in her will. You don’t expect
me to take help from her that she wanted to <span class="it">prevent</span>,
do you? Never in this world!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“There! You see?” Mrs. Oliphant lamented,
appealing to her husband. “I knew it hurt him,
in spite of what he said. I knew it!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You’re all wrong,” Dan stoutly maintained.
“She kind of explained to me what she was goin’ to
do, though I didn’t see what she meant. It was just
a few minutes before she died. She told me to remember
not to be hurt, but she needn’t have worried
about it, and I told her so. So don’t <span class="it">you</span> worry
about it. I didn’t begin to build Ornaby on my expectations
from her; I’ve carried it along this far
by myself, and I expect to carry it the rest of the
way. And I’m goin’ to build that factory! George
McMillan thinks maybe he can float some of the
stock for it in New York, and I don’t know but
he’s got a little money of his own he may want to
put in. The way I feel, why, it looks to me as if I
was about ready to climb out on the top o’ the heap
right now; and I’m certainly not baby enough to be
hurt because my grandmother didn’t have any faith
in me.”</p>

<p class="pindent">He continued to protest and perhaps protested
too much; for although it was clear enough to his
parents that he was so heartened by his thirty-five
hundred dollars as to anticipate miracles, yet it was
not to be believed that his pride had suffered no injury
at all. What appeared in his grandmother’s
will as a severe criticism of his ability and judgment
was more than a mere neutral lack of faith; and
Mrs. Oliphant’s intuition had touched the truth;
he was indeed hurt—but he never admitted it.</p>

<p class="pindent">Moreover, he remained steadfast in refusal; he
would neither allow his mother to help him with
money nor countenance any appeal of hers, or his
father’s, to Harlan. Both of them, uncountenanced,
did with faint hope reopen the subject to Harlan,
though they did it indirectly;—they made allusions
to the pathos of the brave and independent position
his brother had taken. But Harlan only looked
slightly badgered, and replied that this extolled position
of Dan’s was the only possible correct one
under the circumstances.</p>

<p class="pindent">From time to time the troubled parents tried other
diplomacies of increasing feebleness, until finally
it seemed best to mention the subject, even indirectly,
no more. In the evenings the silences in the
library were charged with feeling withheld from expression;
though Dan enlivened the room when he
came in, and made it boisterous if he brought the
baby with him. Certainly no depression could be
recorded against either of this pair; Henry Daniel
glowed with health and became livelier with every
month of increasing age and weight. As for Lena,
after her outburst upon the reading of Mrs. Savage’s
will, she was another of this household who was
surcharged with repressed feeling; but her repression
became a habit;—weeks went by when she did not
slam a door. She appeared to become more tolerant
of her husband at this period than she had ever been;
and when she spoke to him at all, it was in a tone
suggesting that her tolerance had in it something of
compassion.</p>

<p class="pindent">She devoted herself to her baby, perhaps finding
a refuge in her devotion; but she declined to accompany
Dan on Sunday afternoons when he went
for a sidewalk excursion with the perambulator.
This was an established custom in the town, she observed:
every Sunday, early in the afternoon, the
young fathers and mothers began to appear upon
the sidewalks, the fathers pushing the baby-carriages
and the mothers strolling a little way behind
with the toddlers, if there were any of these, or perhaps
lingering for a moment of gossip with friends
encountered by the way, then scurrying on to overtake
the perambulator.</p>

<p class="pindent">High and low followed the custom; it was as well
observed by the South Side, where lived most of the
followers of handicrafts, as it was upon National
Avenue and Amberson Boulevard. The perambulators
of these two thoroughfares were the more
luxurious; fine lace was to be seen upon the occupants,
and the accompanying parents were well
dressed; though Lena, looking from her window,
sometimes shivered to see one of the passing young
husbands wearing a Derby hat as a complement to
the long frock coat that appeared to be a regalia
garment necessary to this occasion.</p>

<p class="pindent">By four o’clock, which was Dan’s favourite hour
for his weekly perambulator stroll, most of the
pedestrian families were on their way homeward
from “Sunday dinner at grandpa’s and grandma’s,”
the grandma and grandpa being almost invariably
the parents of the young mother. Lena objected
to the parade as “publicly provincial,” and pointed
out that Dan lacked any plausible reason for joining
it;—if the baby needed air he could be taken for a
drive in the family carriage; and if Dan insisted on
pushing him in the perambulator, the Oliphants’
back yard was “twice the size of Madison Square,”
she said with elaborate exaggeration; but Henry
Daniel’s father only laughed and continued to follow
the custom of his fellow-townsmen.</p>

<p class="pindent">The Sunday-afternoon excursion with the perambulator
gave him his greatest happiness, and all
through his bustling week days of work he looked forward
to it, chuckling as he thought of it. And when
the rewarding hour arrived, he went forth wheeling
his son before him and cheerily unconscious that he
was the only father in sight not accompanied (even
at a distance) by a second parent for the occupant
of the perambulator. He was proud to exhibit
Henry Daniel and loved nothing better than to lift
him out of the little carriage and talk uproarious
baby-talk to him, and tickle him to make him laugh,
and in every other possible manner show him off to
other young parents—or to anybody who had time
to listen to these hilarious paternal banalities. If
other parents bragged of their own young, showing
them off in turn, Dan’s manifestations with Henry
Daniel would become but the louder; and if the other
parents, being two to one, succeeded in drowning
him out, he would restore his child to the perambulator
tenderly and move on, sorry for people who had
so little to make such a fuss about.</p>

<p class="pindent">Sunday, he said, was the only day when he had a
chance to get really acquainted with the baby; for
all the rest of the week Dan was out hustling so early
and so late that opportunities for making the acquaintance
more intimate were few. A great part
of his activity at this time was in the chase of possible
buyers of Ornaby ground; and a driven life was led
by those three men who had thought they might buy
lots after the foreclosure. The Earl of Ornaby
gave them little rest; and although he sometimes remained
away from one or another of them for days
at a time—perhaps upon the ardent request, “Well,
for heaven’s sakes can’t you even give me a chance
to think it <span class="it">over</span>?”—he would write frequent letters
to the pursued creature in the interval. Incessantly
he persuaded, argued, and prophesied; seldom has
a half-accepted, half-rejected lover shown such hot
persistence in convincing his lady; and probably
never have three dismal men in moderate circumstances
been so urgently courted into the buying of
lots.</p>

<p class="pindent">They were not friends, these men; they had gone
separately to Ornaby and had no knowledge of one
another when the pursuit of them began; but they
knew one another well before it was over. The vehement
salesman had so quoted them to one another,
making such glorifying use of their every admission
not actually condemning Ornaby, that a conference
of the quoted seemed to be a necessity. They
thought to meet in secret; but within ten minutes
found the hunter upon them.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Gentlemen,” he began, “you wish to be alone,
and I will not interrupt you”—and talked until two
of them went home.</p>

<p class="pindent">He went with them, and then returned to talk
some more to the man at whose house the conference
had been called.</p>

<p class="pindent">Such deadly persistence finally prevailed upon a
majority of the three and two more lots were sold
in the Addition upon the liberal terms of nothing
down and little more than nothing to be paid in
periodical installments. Nevertheless, here were
three actual sales, and if there ever lived a salesman
who knew how to make three appear to be a hundred,
because he himself believed three to be a hundred,
that multi-visioned salesman was Daniel Oliphant.</p>

<p class="pindent">In a day of quieter art certain academicians now
gone from their academies had frequently the desire
to paint pretty young women blue-robed and poised
as if alighting from the air. Sometimes, upon the
lower part of his canvas, beneath the poising lady’s
alighting toe, such a painter would twirl a golden
circle, then swathe her eyes with a blue kerchief and
name the picture, “Dame Fortune on her Wheel.”
The effect was of the dame blind, but dancing; and
sometimes the course of events in the life of a human
creature will warrant the conception, yet it has
usually been observed that Fortune seldom dances to
one who has not diligently begged the favour. It
would seem the blinded lady has a little bit of her
kerchief up.</p>

<p class="pindent">The man who had built a picnic shack at Ornaby
for his large family found his wife and children so
reluctant to come home from the picnics that he
enlarged the shack, put a cooking-stove and cots in
it, and began to stay there from Saturday afternoon
until Monday morning. His house was far down in
the city where the smoke had begun to discourage
his wife, and, in the unavailing struggle to keep
things clean, she grew querulous. “If we could
only <span class="it">live</span> out here!” she wailed one day when they
were at the shack; and this outcry produced the first
house in Ornaby Addition. It was a cottage of the
“New Colonial” kind; and Dan drove all of his other
Ornaby boosters to see every new phase of its construction,
from the digging of the cellar to the
polishing of the floors; for when the cottage was begun
the purchasers of land in the Addition were increased
in number to eight. By the time the cottage
was finished there were fourteen, and several of these
intended to build “right the first minute next
spring,” Dan said.</p>

<p class="pindent">He called them his “Ornaby boosters”; for he
readily adopted the new vocabulary of commercial argot
then being developed by “promoters,” by writers
of advertisements, and by New York hustlers for
trade. “Every Ornaby buyer is an Ornaby booster,”
he said one day, when the new cottages in the Addition
had brought him new buyers of lots; and, falling
instantly in love with the cadence of this alliteration,
went straight to the billboard men. Thereafter no
one could go northward of the city for an afternoon
drive and fail to find the gentle landscape wrecked.
On every road the earl blazoned his great defacements:
“Every Ornaby Buyer is an Ornaby Booster!”</p>

<p class="pindent">At home he had two subjects, both subdivided.
One was Henry Daniel, his growth, his wit, and his
precocity; and the other was Ornaby Addition, its
present magnificence and prospective splendour.</p>

<p class="pindent">“And the queer thing is,” Harlan told Martha
Shelby, “he believes every word of it. He actually
still believes he’s making a success of that dreadful
place. Isn’t it strange?”</p>

<p class="pindent">But Martha said that she knew something stranger,
and when he asked her what it was, she answered:
“Why, it’s your still believing he <span class="it">isn’t</span> making a
success of the ‘dreadful place.’ ”</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XIX</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="dropcap">H</span>ARLAN laughed ruefully and told her that
time, tide, and travel failed to alter her.
“You don’t change as much as—as much
as”—he looked about him for a comparison, and
found one ready to hand in the material of which
the Shelbys’ veranda was made. “You don’t change
as much as this Western limestone does. It’s made
of stone, too, but years and weather take its edges off
and give it the look of being not so hard as it used to
be.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Not defending herself from the criticism, she gazed
thoughtfully at Harlan as he sat fanning himself
with his straw hat—he was warm and flushed after
their walk on this hot June morning—then she turned
her eyes again to the wide lawn stretching before her
down to the National Avenue sidewalk. Looking
out from the shade of the veranda, her eyes needed
the shelter of the curved fingers of her hand, a protection
she gave them, resting her elbow on the
stone railing beside her. The trimmed grass of the
lawn was a blazing green, seen waveringly through
visible pulsations of the heated air; the fountain
swan, still diligent under every discouragement,
sprayed forth no skyward rainbow mists, but ejected
a limpid rod of water of so brief an uplift that the
bird seemed to carry in his throat the curved tip of a
shepherd’s crook made of glass. The asphalt street,
beyond the shade of its bordering maples, lay steaming
and smelled of tar;—drooping bicyclists rode
there, tinkling their little bells for a right of way.
Surreys and phaetons gave them courteous passage,
and frequently a swifter, noisier vehicle went by,
grinding, squawking, and leaving blue oil-smoke on
the air.</p>

<p class="pindent">There were many more automobiles than when she
had last gone away, Martha noticed; yet the outlook
from the veranda was the old familiar one. To her
eyes, however, it bore the familiar unfamiliar appearance
that well-known things bear to the traveller
at home again, but not yet quite adjusted after a
long absence. For this was not her return from the
little run she had made to England at the time of
the baby’s christening next door, though that excursion
was itself a longer one—much to her taste—than
she had planned. The bit of old hickory
serving her as a father resisted stiffly, but finally
proved flexible under great pressure, and she took
him even to Russia before she got through bending
him. When his protestive squeakings at last became
unbearable, she brought him home, but did not remain
herself. In the Italian Alps there was a valley
town with which she had fallen in love;—she returned
to her native land merely as an escort for Mr. Shelby,
and, having deposited him safely, hurried back to
the terraced vineyards, the whitewashed walls with
strings of red peppers dangling against them, and
the frescoed old villa she had rented in the foreground
of this picture.</p>

<p class="pindent">It was a commonplace, she said, that the new
Twentieth Century was the age of the annihilation
of distances; people talked from New York to Chicago
over a wire; the Atlantic was crossed in six
days, the American continent in four; and her
father could remember when it took him three weeks
to get to Philadelphia; he “wouldn’t mind being
taken care of by correspondence.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Old Hickory, well-warranted in his outburst, replied
that he didn’t “need any takin’ care of, thank
you”—he was tired of being bossed to death, and
he wanted her to understand she was mighty welcome
to go and stay as long as she had a mind to! If she
remained at home, he wouldn’t know when she
might be draggin’ him off again without his exactly
knowin’ how it happened. It was “curious,” he
continued; he had sense enough never to let her interfere
with him in his business; but in other matters
he never knew when he mightn’t find himself in
some dog-gone place he didn’t <span class="it">want</span> to be in—at a
plague-taken pink tea maybe, or even right spang in
the middle of Europe in some heaven-forsaken garlic
heap, with nothin’ to think about but old dead monks
and nothin’ to do but hate the smell. If Martha
liked hangin’ around those old worn-out nations
that never showed a sign o’ life except advertisin’
chocolate and keepin’ their fertilizer right under
their front parlour window for fear somebody’d steal
it, why, she was certainly good and welcome to all she
wanted of ’em! For himself, he had his business to
’tend to; and he didn’t want any aunt Ella to pester
him, either; “aunt Ella” being his widowed sister,
whom Martha had proposed as a housekeeper in substitute
for herself. He was full and able—thank you
again!—to get up in the morning and eat his ham
and eggs without somebody’s pinning a bib around
his neck, and he believed he knew how to wash and
go to bed at night without any fussy woman fixin’ up
his bureau every other day, so as to hide his nightshirts
from him! Altogether, he was lookin’ forward
to a little rest and liberty, thank you!</p>

<p class="pindent">So Martha had gone with his earnest consent; for
his complaint of her did not lack reason—she was
headstrong and a compelling daughter—and she
stayed until she had her fill of Italy for that while.
Meantime, the abandoned father contentedly lived
alone, except for his negro servants, and declared
that at last he was his own man and began to feel
as if he owned his own house; he felt that way
for the first time since his daughter was born, he
said. But a different view of his condition was
maintained by a member of the household next
door.</p>

<p class="pindent">“A fine exhibition of filial duty!” Lena cried, in
one of the irritated moods that returned upon her
as the growing Henry Daniel began to be a little boy
instead of a little baby. When he was a noisy little
boy during the day his mother often became reminiscent,
not happily, by the time his father came
home in the evening. “You told me once she had a
heart as big as she was,” Lena went on. “It looks
like it, doesn’t it? Leaving that poor old man
alone over there, month after month and year after
year!”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan listened absently, his mind on a new customer
for a lot. “Who you talkin’ about now?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You know! That big girl of yours.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Martha?” he said, his tone a weary one instantly.
“How often have I told you she never was any girl
of mine, big or little? What’s started you on <span class="it">that</span>
again?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I shouldn’t think you’d expect it would take
much to start me,” Lena exclaimed, “when you remember
you gave me your sacred promise I should
have a year in Europe——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, Lordy! Have we got to go all over that
again?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“—And when you remember you deliberately
broke your word to me,” Lena went on, “and haven’t
ever even made the slightest effort to keep it! You
hold me here, suffocating in this place, year after
year——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Now, see here,” he interrupted; “just think a
minute, please! Is that fair? Haven’t you been
back to New York every year for at least two or
three——”</p>

<p class="pindent">But Lena almost shouted her interruption. “Yes!
Two or three <span class="it">weeks</span>! To visit my <span class="it">fam</span>ily! Do you
think it means happiness for me to be with <span class="it">them</span>?—and
all of ’em watching to see how I take care of my
baby! Is that keeping your word to take me abroad?
Oh,” she cried, with bitter laughter, “doesn’t it
seem ironical even to you? That big creature next
door was so jealous of me because I had what she
wanted she couldn’t bear to stay where she had to
look at it, so she goes away and gets what <span class="it">I</span> wanted!
<span class="it">Isn’t</span> it ironical, Dan? Don’t you see it at all?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I see you’ve got your imagination all stirred up
again, that’s all.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Imagination!” she cried. “Yes; I should think
my imagination <span class="it">would</span> get ‘all stirred up!’ Why, it’s
funny! She can go and take what I want, but it
can’t be any good to her; she hasn’t culture enough
to see it or to feel it or to hear it. I can see her
carrying that accent around Europe, and asking
waiters for ‘ice wat-urr’ and ‘please to pass the
but-urr!’ Yet she can go and I can’t!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But <span class="it">I</span> didn’t send her,” Dan explained, since his
wife clearly implied his responsibility. “You talk
as if I——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No; but you had no right not to send <span class="it">me</span> after
giving me your sacred——”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan interrupted her genially; he smiled and
patted her pretty little shoulder, though it twitched
away from his touch. “Lena, look here: I’ve got
some big deals on, and I’m just about certain they’re
goin’ to work out the right way. You see up to now
the trouble’s been that all the money comin’ in had
to be put right out again almost before I’d get hold
of it. If it hadn’t been for that, I’d had that factory
up and running long ago. But as I look ahead now,
everything is mighty good—<span class="it">mighty</span> good! If I can
just put these deals through——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes; it’s always ‘if,’ ” she reminded him. “When
have I ever talked to you that you weren’t just about
to put through some ‘mighty big deals’? You said
exactly the same last year.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, but this is a better year than last year.
Why, I’ve done twice the business—yes, better’n
that; it’s more like four times what I did last year.
If Ornaby keeps on like this, why, a few years from
now——”</p>

<p class="pindent">She stopped him; informing him that she’d long
since heard more than enough about “a few years
from now”; whereupon, being full of the subject,
he went down to the library to tell his father and
mother what was inevitable within a few years. No
skepticism dampened his library prophecies now;
Harlan was no longer there to listen, staring with
dry incredulity through his glasses.</p>

<p class="pindent">Harlan had not sold Mrs. Savage’s old house, but
had moved into it, and kept as precise a routine there
as she had kept, and with the same servants. He
had two bedrooms upstairs made into a library, but
changed nothing on the lower floor; and often the old
lady seemed still to be there in authority. At twilight,
before Nimbus lit the electric table lamp in the
“south front parlour,” the room to which she had always
descended from her afternoon nap, it was not difficult
to imagine that she was sitting in the stiff chair
beside the plate-glass window. Of course Nimbus
believed that he saw her there when he came in to
light the lamp; and he often mumbled to her—always
upon the same theme. He was grateful for the one
hundred and thirty-five dollars she had left him,
but considered the sum inadequate.</p>

<p class="pindent">“No’m, indeed,” he said to the figure he saw in
the stiff chair. “I thank you kindly, but didn’ I
used you right all my days? How much it cost you
slip down ten hunderd thirty-five on that paper,
’stead of one hunderd thirty-five? <span class="it">You</span> ain’t got it,
are you? Ain’t doin’ <span class="it">you</span> no good, do it? No’m,
indeedy! ’Tain’t no use you bein’ sorry, neither.
Make all the fuss you want to; you too late; nobody
ain’t goin’ pay no ’tention to you!”</p>

<p class="pindent">And in the kitchen he would discuss the apparition
with his fourth wife, the fat cook, Myrtle. “Look
to me like she can’t keep away,” he would say. “Set
there same as ever. Set up straight in that stiff chair.
See her plain as I see you, till I git that lamp lit.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Landy me, Nimbus, I wouldn’ go in that room
unlessen the light bright as day if you give me
trottin’ horse an’ gole harniss! How you keep from
hollerin’?”</p>

<p class="pindent">At this the tall, thin old fellow would laugh without
making a sound; deep wrinkles in the design of
half of a symmetrical cobweb appearing on each side
of his face. Some profoundly interior secret of his
might have been betrayed, it seemed, if he had allowed
his merriment to become vocal; and this noiseless
laugh of his awed his wife in much the same way,
no doubt, that the laugh of a jungle witch-doctor
ancestor of his had awed wives not unlike Myrtle.
“She ain’t goin’ bother me ner you,” he explained.
“She ain’t settin’ there ’count o’ me ner you. She
settin’ there ’cause she so mad.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Who? Who she mad at?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Mad at somep’m!” Nimbus would say, and, becoming
less uncomfortably mystic might allow a
human chuckle to escape him. “Set there mad long
as she want to; ’tain’t goin’ do her no good. She
ain’t <span class="it">fixed</span> to make no changes now!”</p>

<p class="pindent">The new owner lived in the old house almost as
quietly as Mrs. Savage, in the visions of Nimbus,
went on living there. Harlan had several times
thought of going to Italy, but the idea never culminated
in action.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I wanted to come, though,” he told Martha, as
they sat on her veranda that hot morning, the day
after her return. “I wanted to more than I ever
wanted to do anything else. You see I’ve almost
stopped going to the office; I just dangle about there
sometimes to please father, but I don’t care to practise
law. It’s a silly way of spending one’s life after
all, fighting the sordid disputes of squabbling people.
There was really nothing to keep me here.”</p>

<p class="pindent">She did not alter her attitude, but still looked out
upon the old familiar unfamiliar scene from beneath
her sheltering curved fingers. “If you wanted to
come, why didn’t you?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Because I’d only have done it to see you, and I
suppose I have a remnant of pride. If you’d like a
better answer, think of what I told you about yourself.
I didn’t come because I know you’re stony.
I knew you hadn’t changed.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“About what?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“About me,” he said, and added: “About anything!”</p>

<p class="pindent">At this she turned her head and looked at him, for
he spoke with a sour significance. “Well, have you
changed, Harlan?” she asked gravely.</p>

<p class="pindent">“About you,” he answered. “I haven’t—unfortunately.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But I meant: Have <span class="it">you</span> changed about anything?
Aren’t you just what you were five or six
years ago, only a little intensified—and richer?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Ah, I knew I’d get that,” he said. “I knew it
would come before I could be with you long. I told
my father and mother the very day my grandmother’s
will was read that you’d hate me for it, and
mother agreed quickly enough.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, no,” Martha said, and her surprise was
genuine. “Why should I hate you because Mrs.
Savage——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Because she left it to me and not to Dan, and because
I didn’t think it was right or sensible to help
him with any of it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But he hasn’t needed any help,” Martha said.
“It’s much better for him to be doing it without any
help, and so splendidly.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“So splendidly?” Harlan repeated, and he stared
at her. “But you don’t take what Dan says seriously,
do you? You don’t think that just because
he says——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I haven’t seen him, Harlan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But you speak as if you believe he’s actually succeeding
in making that old fantasia of his into a
reality.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well,” she said, “isn’t he?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What? Why, he’s still just barely keeping his
head above water. He sells vacant lots out there,
yes—but to keep on selling them he has to put all
they sell for into developing the land he hasn’t sold.
It amounts precisely to the same thing as giving the
property away. His mortgages used to worry him to
death, but he’s got most of the place mortgaged now
for three times what it was five years ago. You
see——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I see that the land must be worth three times as
much as it was five years ago, since he can borrow
three times as much on it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But, my dear Martha——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But, my dear Harlan!” she echoed mockingly,
and thus disposed of his argument before he could deliver
it. “The truth is, you’ve had the habit of undervaluing
Dan so long that you can’t get over it.
You can’t see that at last he’s begun to make a success
of his ‘fantasia.’ Given time enough, critics
who aren’t careful to keep themselves humble-minded
always lose the power to see things as they are.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Harlan winced a little under this sententious assault,
and laughed at himself for wincing; then explained
his rather painful laughter. “It’s almost
amusing to me to find myself still cowering away from
your humble-minded criticisms of me—just as I used
to, Martha!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, I know it,” she admitted. “I hate myself
for the way I talk to you, Harlan;—somehow you always
make me smug and superior. I’m the foolish
kind of person who’s always made critical by superior
criticism—critical of the critic, I mean.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But I’m not more critical of Dan than other
people are. Have you asked your father what he
thinks of Ornaby now, for instance?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, I asked him last night.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What does he think of it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“He thinks the same as I do,” she said. “He’s
been compelled to recognize that it’s going to be a
tremendous success.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Then he’s changed his mind since last week,”
Harlan returned, somewhat discomfited. “He told
me——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, yes, I know,” she said. “He didn’t say he
thought it would be a success. He said he thought
the Addition idea was just as crazy as he ever did,
and Dan Oliphant was the biggest fool in seven
states, and the noisiest! Those were his words
precisely, Harlan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But you just told me——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No,” she explained;—“you asked me what he
<span class="it">thought</span>. Do you suppose he’d admit to me that he
ever made a business mistake? He knows perfectly
well that he did make one when he refused to follow
my advice and buy some of Dan’s stock when the
poor boy was trying to finance his plan at the beginning.
Papa confessed it absolutely.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“He did?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Certainly,” she replied. “If he’d meant what
he said he’d just have grunted it. Instead, he yelled
it at me. With papa, that’s exactly the same as a
perfectly open confession.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Harlan shook his head, remaining more than
doubtful of this interpretation. “So you believe if
Dan tried now to organize a stock company for
Ornaby——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“They’d gobble it!” she said. “Papa especially!
But he and others like him wouldn’t buy a single
share when poor Dan went begging and peddling all
over town; and now I’m glad they didn’t. It’s so
much better for him to have done it alone.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But, my dear,” Harlan insisted, not altogether
without exasperation, “he <span class="it">hasn’t</span> done it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“My dear,” she returned promptly; “he’s <span class="it">going</span>
to!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But, Martha——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Listen,” she said. “I’ll tell you something that
you don’t understand, because you’ve been living
here all along. When I went off to college, I spent
the Christmas holidays visiting some Eastern girls,
and papa didn’t see me for a whole year. Then he
nearly fainted—I’d grown so! Yet I’d grown just
as much the year before, but he never noticed it because
I was living at home where he saw me every
day. It’s the same way with a city like this, Harlan.
I haven’t been here for so long that I can see the
change. Everything is going to happen that Dan
prophesied.”</p>

<p class="pindent">She had spoken with gravity, but Harlan laughed,
not impressed. “Yes, the boosters brag of the increase
in population shown by the last census,” he
said. “We’ve got a few thousand more Italians
and Polish Jews and negroes, I suppose; and some
new ugly factories and dwelling-houses of objectionable
architecture. They’re beginning to build awful
little shacks they call ‘bungalows,’ hurrying them
up by the dozen. Is that the glorious cosmopolis
of your hero’s prophecies, Martha? To my mind
it’s only an extension of hideousness, and down
where I live, in my grandmother’s old house, it’s
getting so smoky in winter that the air is noxious—the
whole town’s dirty, for that matter.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes,” she said. “Yesterday, as soon as I got
here, I noticed that even in summer the air’s smokier
than it used to be. I think the city was a cleaner
place and a better-looking place when I went away.
There’s the smoke, of course, and I’ve already seen
how they’re beginning to tear old buildings down
and put up bigger ones, and no building has any
thought of having the slightest relation to the ones
on each side of it. In a way, as you say, it’s getting
hideous, though some of these long, wide streets are
pleasant, even to a person who’s stayed in Europe too
long perhaps—and National Avenue is really beautiful.
I don’t know where except in towns like this
you’ll find a long street of such big, solid, comfortable
houses with green trees and clean lawns about them.
This part of the town, at least, hasn’t changed; but a
change has begun, and I believe it’s the growth—I
think it’s the incredible growth that Dan predicted,
Harlan. I think it’s begun.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Again she had spoken gravely, though with a glinting
look at him which had in it some hint of triumph,
and piqued him.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, if this fabulous growth <span class="it">has</span> begun,” he said
incautiously, “you’re surely not hero-worshipper
enough to think it’s going to extend as far as Ornaby
Addition, are you?”</p>

<p class="pindent">She had hoped for this, had led him into it.
“Papa’s going to begin building an extension of the
Tennessee Avenue car line next month,” she said.
“I forced him to admit how far out it would run.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Not so far as the Addition?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Within an eighth of a mile of it,” said Martha.
“That’s what made him so noisy!”</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XX</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="dropcap">H</span>ARLAN was astonished, but he took his
little defeat well; and Martha in turn encountered
a surprise, for he showed a discomfited
kind of pleasure. “So Ornaby Addition’s
going to get its rapid transit at last,” he said. “That’s
not so bad, you know. Why, Dan might come out
pretty well on the thing after all!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But doesn’t that annoy you, Harlan?” she asked.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You mean that I <span class="it">want</span> to see my brother beaten?
That I really haven’t good will toward him?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, indeed I don’t. I mean: Wouldn’t it annoy
you to find you’d always been mistaken about
him?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But I’m not. I grew up in the same house with
him, and I ought to know him. If he does happen
to do anything with his wild old idea after all, it’ll
be by the grace of a series of miracles no one could
possibly have foreseen.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“That is to say,” Martha observed, “you’d call
him ‘a fool for luck.’ ”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Let’s put it, I <span class="it">hope</span> he is.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“And you were just telling me <span class="it">I</span> didn’t change!”
she cried.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes,” he returned placidly;—“it seems we’re
neither of us wiser than we used to be. We sit here
talking of Dan and his Addition just as we’d have
been talking about them if you’d never been away.
You really ought to be speaking with a slight foreign
accent and unable to put your mind on anything
later than the seventeenth century.”</p>

<p class="pindent">She nodded, agreeing. “Yes, it’s queer; and it
makes me <span class="it">feel</span> a little queer. You go away and stay
for ever and ever; then you come back home and
by the time your trunk’s unpacked you’re ready to
wonder if you’ve been away at all;—maybe you’ve
just had a long dream. Of course, too, I knew what
was going on at home—not through papa!—but
some of the girls of our old set here have been faithful
about writing, in spite of their every single one of ’em
getting married. That makes me feel I belong to
the seventeenth century—almost ‘<span class="it">cinquecento</span>!’ ”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’d prefer the ‘<span class="it">cinquecento</span>,’ ” Harlan said, and
immediately added: “Not that I care for it myself.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What!” she cried, her eyes widening. “You’d
even criticize the Renaissance?”</p>

<p class="pindent">It appeared that he would, and willingly. Offhand
he called the Renaissance “a naïve movement amusingly
overrated and with the single merit that it was
better than what had gone before.” Martha was
indignant, and they had an argument in which she
proved to be no match for him. He had not been
abroad since his junior vacation as an undergraduate,
but he knew a great deal more about Italy than she
did, though she had just come from long residence
there. She continued to disagree with him, and presently
was surprised by the suspicion that she enjoyed
hearing him talk, and in a way, found him
congenial in spite of their differences.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You’re the only person I ever heard of that
criticized the Renaissance,” she said, when he got
up to go. “You’re all wrong, of course, even if I
can’t prove it. You’re too much for me, but that’s
only because you’re such an admirable bookworm.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Then, as he went down the long path to the gate,
she observed that his shoulders had acquired a little
more habitual stoop in them than she remembered.
Otherwise the tall figure might have been that of a
thin athlete; and Harlan had a well-shaped head;—she
was readily able to comprehend what one of her
friends had written her of him: “And Harlan Oliphant
seems to be just as sarcastic as he used to be,
but he <span class="it">is</span> awfully distinguished-looking as he grows
older.” Nevertheless, even in this view of his back,
Martha found something irritating, something consciously
aristocratic, over-fastidious, skeptical, and
precise. “That’s just what you are!” she said half-aloud,
before she turned to go into the house. “You
can be rather fascinating, but you’re really only an
admirable bookworm in a nice, clean white collar!”</p>

<p class="pindent">The admirable bookworm, unconscious that the
definition of him had been enlarged, walked down
National Avenue, keeping within the continuous
shade of the big maple trees and perplexing himself
with introspections as he went. He was dry and cold,
as he knew, yet far from incapable of ardour, and he
had never entirely lost the ardour he felt for Martha;
but what surprised him was the renewed liveliness of
that ancient pain she evoked within him. He had
thought it dead, but evidently it had only fallen into
a doze in her absence.</p>

<p class="pindent">Of course he asked himself why he should ache because
she had at once resumed with him her old
critical attitude, and why, moreover, he should care
about her at all. She had almost no coquetry and
little more of the quality called “sheer feminine
charm”; she was too downright and plain-minded to
possess much of either. She was not masculine yet,
as her father said with the plaintive irascibility of a
man who knows because he has suffered, she was
imperious. “A man might as well be dead as bossed
to death,” he often complained. And although she
was a handsome creature and graceful, Harlan saw a
dozen prettier girls at the new Country Club every
day that he played golf there. Notwithstanding all
this, she had only to let him see her again after years
of absence, and at once his heart leaped, then ached,
and he could think of nothing but this Martha who
thought so little of himself.</p>

<p class="pindent">He was not the only member of his family who
found Martha’s return disturbing; his sister-in-law
also had long thoughts connected with the arrival
from Italy. That evening before dinner, Dan was
whistling in his bathroom, shampooing himself lavishly,
when Lena came into his bedroom and addressed
him through the open door.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I suppose you’ve seen her,” she said, and gave
utterance to an emotional little titter that quickly
stopped his whistling.</p>

<p class="pindent">He had heard such semblances of amusement from
her often enough to understand their prophetic meaning.
“In for it again!” was instantly his thought.
“Seen her?” he said. “Who do you mean?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Your fair mountain range,” Lena replied, affecting
a light mockery. “Of course you didn’t know
she’s home again! Innocent old Dannie!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I heard she was to get here to-day, so I suppose
she’s here; but I haven’t seen her. What about it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, nothing!” Lena returned, continuing her
archness. “Do you suppose she can stand it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Stand what?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, the sight of us—of her old sweetheart
married to me,” Lena explained. “She’s stayed
away till she thought she could bear it, but do you
suppose she <span class="it">will</span> be able to?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, I think she’ll bear it,” he said gruffly and
went on with his lathering.</p>

<p class="pindent">“How about you? Do you think <span class="it">you’ll</span> be able
to contain yourself when you——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I expect so.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why don’t you ask me how she looks?” Lena
inquired, still affecting to rally him gaily. “I know
you’re dying to. I’ve seen her; I was looking from
my window and saw her go out and walk up the street
this afternoon. I laughed so!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What about?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“She was such a perfect picture of a big Western
woman! Absolutely typical!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You mean like mother, for instance?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No; your mother’s a dear thing who’d be lovely
anywhere; I never think of her as Western at all,”
Lena said. “She isn’t.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“She is as much as Martha is—or anybody else.
She was born here and——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Not at all!” Lena interrupted airily. “The real
Western woman is like your mountain girl. They
<span class="it">love</span> to be huge; that’s why they live in the prairie
country—so they’ll look even bigger. One reason I
laughed was because your friend was just exactly as
much the typical Western woman after all this time
abroad as she was before she went. She was wearing
all kinds of expensive clothes, and I haven’t a doubt
she’d got them in Paris, but on her they looked perfectly
as Western as if she’d just bought ’em and put
’em on downtown at Kohn &amp; Sons! Do you suppose
you’ll be able to control your raptures at all when you
meet her again, old innocent Dannie?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“See here,” he said, “I wish you’d let me get fixed
for dinner. I had a pretty hot day’s work and I’d
like to——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Of course you would!” Lena said. “You’d like
to make yourself beautiful because you’re going to
hurry over there to her just as soon as you’ve finished
your dinner, aren’t you? That’s what you have
been planning, isn’t it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, yes; certainly,” he answered. “I’d like
to have you go with me. She’s an old friend of mine
and all our family; she’s been away a long time, and
it wouldn’t look very cordial not to——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, no; so it wouldn’t!” Lena mocked, but
now her mockery was openly acrid. “It wouldn’t
look <span class="it">cordial</span> and naturally you’d hate to have her
think you lacked cordiality—a woman you were so
cordial with you wanted your child to grow up to be
like her instead of like its mother!—a woman you
were so cordial with you had to hold her hand the
very day you brought your bride home! It would
be <span class="it">terrible</span> to have her think——”</p>

<p class="pindent">But here Dan closed the door, though not so
sharply as Lena closed the outer door of his bedroom
when she went out of it an instant later.</p>

<p class="pindent">The subject of Martha’s return was not again
mentioned directly during the evening; and after
dinner, when Lena with arch significance inquired
of her silent husband why he had settled down at the
library table to write business letters when there
was “so much to do in the neighbourhood,” Dan
replied, without looking up, that his letters were
important—he’d have to beg to be excused from
talking. Lena picked up a book, and retired to the
easy-chair and the lamp in the bay window, which
had once been Harlan’s favourite reading place; but
she did not read. She sat looking steadily at her
husband—as he thoroughly and uncomfortably understood,
though he kept doggedly at his writing.</p>

<p class="pindent">After a time his mother and father were heard in
the hall, going out; and he knew that they were
“going over next door” to bid Martha welcome home.
They had not mentioned where they were going,
and he understood the significance of their not
mentioning it—and so did Lena, as she sat watching
him. He wondered why he did not rise and say to
her: “There’s an old friend of mine next door; I
haven’t seen her for years; I ought to go over and
tell her I’m glad she’s home, and I want to! There’s
no reason I shouldn’t, and you can make the most of
it—I’m going!”</p>

<p class="pindent">Lena had her own wonderings. She wondered
why she was keeping her husband from going. Her
thought was that she ought to say: “I don’t think
I care for you enough any more to have a right to
be jealous. Go to your old friend and tell her you’re
glad she’s home again, since you wish to. I’m not
so small about it as I’m making you think, and I
really don’t care.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Lena wondered why she did not say this to her
husband;—in a manner she wanted to say it, and at
the same time she knew that she would say nothing
of the kind, but on the contrary, intended to keep
him in fear of what she might do if he made any effort
to appear “cordial,” as he had said, to Martha.
Thus the husband and wife sat—the husband bent
over his writing and the wife looking at him, her book
in her lap. When she looked away from him it was
not to the book that her gaze went, but to the wall
across the room, where she saw nothing to please her;
and when she had looked at the wall for a time she
always looked again at Dan. His own eyes were
kept to the writing upon the table, yet he must have
been conscious of hers when they were upon him, for
a deeper frown came upon his forehead whenever she
looked away from the wall and again at him.</p>

<p class="pindent">After a while Mr. and Mrs. Oliphant were heard
returning, and in the library it somehow seemed
strange, and like an event out of nature’s order, to
hear such brisk and cheerful sounds, when the front
door opened, letting in the two voices and their
owners simultaneously.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Indeed she <span class="it">is</span>!” Mrs. Oliphant was heard to say,
while her husband continued a narrative evidently
begun outside.</p>

<p class="pindent">“And I told her so. I said, ‘By George, if an old
maid’s a person who just gets lovelier and lovelier,
Martha, why, then, maybe you’re——’ ”</p>

<p class="pindent">But here his voice so abruptly dropped to a
mumble no one could have doubted that the suppression
was in obedience to a tactful gesture of his
wife’s; nor was it difficult to picture this gesture as a
movement of Mrs. Oliphant’s hand toward the open
door of the library. Immediately afterward the two
were heard ascending the stairs; the house again
became as quiet as before; Dan went on with his
writing, and Lena with her looking and wondering.</p>

<p class="pindent">Often such a vigil between husband and wife does
not end by leaving things as they were before it
began. Between the two silent people appear to
have taken place communications so imperceptible
that neither is definitely aware of them, yet each
may be affected by them as if by words spoken. It
would seem that there is a danger here; for with
couples not well wedded the unspoken words may be
too true, or may carry altogether too much revelation.
Lena stopped wondering; and then rather
slowly it became clear to her that she and her husband
no longer cared for each other at all. Long,
long she had clung to her belief that she was still in
love with him; and now all she had left to her of this
was that she could still be jealous of him. “A fine
reason for not leaving a man!” she said to herself;—especially
a man who really cared about nothing but
his business and his boy!</p>

<p class="pindent">Suddenly she rose from her chair, the book in her
lap falling to the floor, where she let it remain; and
then she stood still, while Dan glanced up inquiringly
from his work and met the strange, examining, hostile
look she gave him.</p>

<p class="pindent">There was a final moment of silence between them
before Lena hurried across the room and left him.
A minute later Dan rubbed his forehead, wondering
again. Upstairs, Lena had not slammed her door.</p>

<p class="pindent">He had an absent-minded impression that something
had happened, but as its nature seemed indefinite,
and he had now become more interested in
his letters than in Martha’s return or Lena’s temper,
he bent again to his work and kept at it with zest until
after midnight.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XXI</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="dropcap">D</span>AN did not go next day to bid the returned
neighbour welcome home—he thought it
better to postpone the call of greeting he
should have made at once. He knew he should have
made it, if even out of no more than mere neighbourliness;
but gradually it became postponed into the indefiniteness
that means never, a postponement not
without parallel when old friends of husbands return.
Meanwhile, Martha was not again mentioned by
either Lena or her husband; though this is only to
say that she was not orally mentioned between them,
but continued to be the subject of their silences. Dan
did not dare to go to see her; and his own silence,
when he was with his wife, was doggedly protestive,
while Lena’s was inscrutable, though she sometimes
gave him evidences of a faintly amused contempt.
She permitted him to perceive that she despised him,
but not to understand whether she despised him
because he wanted to see Martha or because he was
afraid to do what he wanted.</p>

<p class="pindent">Once or twice, when he came from his long day’s
work, he caught a glimpse of a white figure in the
twilight of the Shelbys’ veranda, and waved his hat,
and thought a hand waved to him in return; but
weeks passed and limp midsummer was almost upon
the town before he had speech again with the slighted
lady, though the slight was always upon his conscience.</p>

<p class="pindent">Upon a hot Sunday noon, when his father and
mother returned from church, he took them to see
the “carpenter shop” he had spent the morning making
in the old summer-house for young Henry—Henry
Daniel no longer, at the boy’s own vehement
request. The grandparents praised the “carpenter
shop” but chided their son for staying away from
church to construct it, and their grandson for missing
Sunday-school. Dan laughed; he had not been to
church in a year; and Henry distorted the cherubic
rotundities of his small face into as much ferocity
as he could accomplish. “I hate Sunday-school,”
he declared; and, as his mother joined them just
then, he seized her hand. “I don’t <span class="it">haf</span> to go ’lessen
I want to. You’ll never get <span class="it">me</span> in that ole hole
again!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“My gracious!” Dan laughed. “It isn’t as bad as
all that. You and I <span class="it">might</span> decide to begin goin’
again sometime, Henry.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I won’t,” Henry said stoutly, and as the group
moved across the lawn, returning toward the house,
he clung to his mother’s hand and repeated that he
didn’t “haf to.” He appealed to Lena piercingly:
“I <span class="it">don’t</span> haf to if I don’t want to, <span class="it">do</span> I, mamma?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, no,” his father assured him. “Of course you
don’t. It wouldn’t do you much good, I expect, if
you don’t like it. You needn’t fret, Henry. I guess
you’ll be a good enough boy without Sunday-school.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I expect so, maybe,” Mr. Oliphant agreed, chuckling
at his grandson’s vehemence. “It’s a good thing
your grandmother Savage can’t hear you, though,
Dan. I never did know what she really believed;
in fact, I rather suspect she was an agnostic in her
heart—but she’d have been shocked to hear you
letting your offspring out of Sunday-school—or anything
else—merely because he doesn’t like it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I expect she would, sir,” Dan said. “But all
that’s changed since her day. People don’t believe
in——” He stopped speaking and moving simultaneously,
and stood staring out at the sidewalk
where his brother and Martha Shelby, walking
slowly, were returning from church.</p>

<p class="pindent">“People don’t believe in what?” Mr. Oliphant inquired,
stopping also.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I—I don’t know, sir,” Dan said vaguely, and he
began to grow red. Harlan and Martha had turned
in at the gate and were coming across the lawn to
them.</p>

<p class="pindent">Martha went first to Lena. “I haven’t had a
chance to say ‘Howdy-do’ to you since I came back,”
she said easily. “I’m ever so glad to see you again.”
Then she turned to Dan, and gave him her hand with
a cordial emphasis of gesture. “It’s fine to see you
again, too, Dan. I want to congratulate you about
Ornaby Addition. You’ll have to look out, though.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I will?” Dan said and added awkwardly, “Well—well,
the—the truth is, I’m mighty glad to see you.
I mean we’re all glad you’re back home again,
Martha.” He was visibly in a state of that almost
certain contagion, embarrassment, and so flounderingly
that he was embarrassing. He dropped Martha’s
cordial hand almost as soon as he touched it,
and at the same instant turned upon his wife a look
of helpless apprehension that would have revealed
everything, if revelation were needed. But Lena
showed herself as little disconcerted as the steady
Martha was; and the look she sent back to her husband
held in it something of the hostile examination
that had come into her eyes on the evening after
Martha’s return, though now it was accompanied
by a bright glint almost hilariously jeering. It was
strikingly successful in effect. Dan gulped, then he
stammered: “How—how do you—how do you mean
I must look out, Martha?”</p>

<p class="pindent">She laughed cheerfully. “I mean you must look
out for some of those wicked old men downtown.
You tried to get them to come in with you at the
start, but they wouldn’t, and pretty soon they’re
going to be furious that they let the chance slip.
They’ll try to get Ornaby away from you, Dan.”
She turned to the little boy, who had been silenced
for a moment by the arrival of this stranger. “I
ought to know you,” she said. “That’s why I
stopped on my way home: I wanted to meet you.
I live next door. Will you shake hands?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No,” Henry replied, because his momentary shyness
had passed and he felt that this refusal would
help to restore the conspicuousness he had been enjoying
as the owner of a new “carpenter shop” and a
rebel against Sunday-school. “I don’t want to. I
don’t want to shake hands.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, Henry dear!” Mrs. Oliphant intervened,
touching her grandson lightly upon the shoulder.
“You don’t mean that! This is our dear friend that
lives next door and <span class="it">likes</span> little boys. You must——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I won’t!” Henry shouted. “I don’t care who she
likes, I don’t want to shake hands.” He intended
no discourtesy; he merely wished to be distinguished,
and in continuance of that desire immediately
doubled himself, placing the top of his head upon the
ground. “I can turn a summerset,” he said. “Want
to see me do it? Watch me! Look!”</p>

<p class="pindent">He failed to accomplish the proposed feat, but at
once attempted it again. “<span class="it">Watch</span> me!” he shouted.
“Look at <span class="it">me</span>! Why don’t you <span class="it">watch</span> me?”</p>

<p class="pindent">He went on with his attempts, more and more
shrilly demanding the public attention that had
wandered from him. Martha had begun to talk to
Mrs. Oliphant; and Lena came close to Harlan for a
moment. “Didn’t leave her accent in Italy!” she
murmured in her little voice; and passed on toward
the house, displaying daintily upon the short grass
pretty white slippers that a girl of twelve might have
worn.</p>

<p class="pindent">Harlan shrugged his shoulders, and his thought
was, “Parisian doll!” as it usually was when his
sister-in-law irritated him. Certainly, if there were
a Parisienne present it was Lena and not the unchanging
Martha in her Paris clothes.</p>

<p class="pindent">The little boy shouted louder and louder, since
attention was still denied him;—he tugged at his
father’s coat, wailing shrilly, “Look at <span class="it">me</span>, papa!
Oh, my goodness, can’t you <span class="it">watch</span> me?”</p>

<p class="pindent">Meanwhile Martha, beaming down upon Mrs.
Oliphant, nevertheless sent an impersonal glance over
that amiable lady’s head to where the child thus
besieged his father, who seemed to be in a temporary
stupor. Dan looked much older, Martha thought,
than when she had gone away; and, though she had
not expected him to retain for ever an unlined face
and his fine figure, she felt a little dismay at finding
him settling into what was strikingly like middle-age.
He was older and heavier than he need have
been, she thought, and a stranger might well have
guessed Harlan to be ten years the younger of the
two.</p>

<p class="pindent">Nowhere in Dan, with his broadened, preoccupied,
and lined face, his heavy, careless figure and his middle-aged
careless clothes, could she discover the jolly
boy she had known, or the youth she had danced
with in college holidays, or the jaunty young man so
dashingly clad who had come home from New York
engaged to be married, and told her so on a February
walk she would always remember. What was more
to her, nowhere in this almost middle-aged man of
business, now beginning to be successful, could she
discover signs of the spirit that once would have
brought him instantly to welcome home an old friend,
even if a wife did threaten. Yet he was a man who
would have swept Lena aside if she had attempted to
interfere with his business, Martha thought—and it
was not a thought that made her happier. She
moved to depart.</p>

<p class="pindent">But at this, the insistent Henry, irritated beyond
measure by the general indifference to his acrobatics,
flung himself upon her, pulling fiercely at
her dress. “My good<span class="it">nuss</span>! Can’t you <span class="it">watch</span> me?
What’s the <span class="it">matter</span> with you? You <span class="it">got</span> to watch
me!”</p>

<p class="pindent">There was a sound of tearing as he pulled at her;—Mr.
Oliphant sprang to him and removed him, but
Martha picked up the lace flounce partly torn from
her skirt, and laughed at the mutilation of her finery.
“No harm at all,” she said, as both Mr. and Mrs.
Oliphant began to apologize for Henry; but their
apologies and her reassurances were not distinctly
audible; nor were her words of departure as she
turned toward the gate with Harlan. Henry had
instantly squirmed from his grandfather’s grasp and
was shriller and louder than ever.</p>

<p class="pindent">“<span class="it">Now</span> I guess you’ll watch me!” he shrieked.
“Look at <span class="it">me</span>, gran’pa! Look at <span class="it">me</span>, everybody!”
He appealed also to his mother, who had paused
near the front steps and stood there, laughing.
“Look at <span class="it">me</span>, mamma! Watch me, now! I’m goin’
to turn a summerset!” He charged into his father’s
legs, yelling, “You’re not lookin’ at <span class="it">me</span>, papa! My
good<span class="it">nuss</span>! Can’t you <span class="it">watch</span> me?” And he continued
to be overwhelmingly vociferous, but Dan,
for the moment, paid no attention.</p>

<p class="pindent">He was wondering how it had happened that
Martha had been so long at home and he had not
taken the few steps—just to next door—to tell her
he was glad she had come back. What if Lena had
made a fuss? It would have been right to go. And
there came to him faintly, faintly, the ghost of a
recollection of a starry night when he and Martha
stood not far from where they were now in this glaring
noon. It had strangely seemed to him then that he
had had a gift from her, something made of no earthly
stuff, something enriching and ineffable. He had
forgotten it; but now he remembered, and at the very
moment of remembering, it seemed to him that the
gift was gone.</p>

<p class="pindent">He stared blankly at her as she passed through the
open gateway, holding her torn dress and chatting
with Harlan; while against Dan’s legs the vehement
Henry was battering himself and shrieking, “Look at
<span class="it">me</span>, papa! My good<span class="it">nuss</span>! <span class="it">Can’t</span> you look at <span class="it">me</span>!”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan consented, and when Martha and Harlan entered
the Shelbys’ gate, beyond, they saw that the
acrobat, still piercingly vociferous, had collected the
attention of all of his audience but one. His mother
still stood near the stone front steps, laughing, not
looking at him; but his grandparents and his father
were applauding him. He was insatiable, however;
keeping them in the hot sun while he performed other
athletic feats. “You <span class="it">shan’t</span> go in the house, gran’ma!”
he screamed. “I’m goin’ to hop on one leg all
across the yard. You got to watch me. You <span class="it">watch</span>
me, gran’ma!”</p>

<p class="pindent">Mrs. Oliphant obediently returned, and the new
entertainment began.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Isn’t it awful?” Harlan groaned. “Isn’t it dismaying
to think what children are coming to nowadays?
I’d hoped you’d let me sit on the veranda a
little while with you, Martha; but I can’t ask you to
stay out in an air made hideous by all this squawking
and squealing.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Then you might come in with me,” she laughed.
“Our walls are pretty thick.”</p>

<p class="pindent">The walls of the big old house were as she said, but
open windows brought the shrill, incessant “Watch
me!” indoors, and the annoyed Harlan complained
further of his nephew. “It makes one respect the
Chinese,” he said. “They at least pay some attention
to ancestors. Only certain tribes biologically
very low worship children, I understand; but that
seems to be our most prevalent American habit
to-day. We’re deliberately making this the age of
the abject worship of children—and I wish my grandmother
could have lived to give her opinion of it!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What do you think she’d say, Harlan?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Isn’t hard to guess! She’d have said we’re heading
the children straight for perdition. In fact, she
thought that about our own generation; she thought
father and mother were heading Dan and me that
way; yet we were under heavy discipline compared
to the way this terrible little Henry’s being brought
up. Lena’s family were severe with her, I understand,
and she doesn’t believe in discipline. As
for Dan, he’s always been just the child’s slave.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Martha looked compassionate. “Yes,” she said
slowly. “I suppose he had to have something he
could worship.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, he’s got Ornaby Addition,” Harlan suggested
dryly.</p>

<p class="pindent">“No. He had to have something besides. I
think he’d have worshipped his wife, if she had ever
let him, but I suppose she——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No,” Harlan said, breaking the indefinite pause
into which Martha had absently strayed. “But
she’s always capable of being jealous.” And he
looked at Martha from the side of his eye.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Jealous of me?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You’ve certainly been made well enough aware
of it from the very day he brought her home,
Martha.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, yes,” she assented cheerfully. “She’s never
doubted that I’ve always cared for Dan, but she
knows that he wasn’t in love with me. She must have
always been sure of that, because—well, here I was—he
had only to step over next door and ask me, but
he asked her, instead. And yet, as you say, she disliked
me from the start. She certainly saw I wasn’t
the sort to take him away from her, even if I’d
thought I could—and I knew I couldn’t. Yet it’s
true she was jealous. Do you know what I think
really made her so, Harlan? I think almost the
principal reason was because I’m so tall.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, I do believe it,” Martha insisted. “Someone
told me she used to be called ‘French doll’ in
New York, and was very sensitive about it. She
wanted to be thought a temperamental and romantic
opera heroine, and would never stand near a tall
woman because she was afraid of being made to look
more like a French doll. I think she couldn’t endure
the thought of her husband’s having a woman friend
as big as I am.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No doubt she’s never wanted to be near you
herself,” Harlan said. “But I think her feeling isn’t
quite so much on the physical plane as that.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, yes, it was. A man mightn’t understand it,
but——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“A man might, though,” he interrupted. “Lena’s
always been afraid that you’re just what she’d call
the type of big Western woman Dan ought to have
married in order to be happy.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What?” Martha cried, but her colour deepened,
and there was agitation in her voice, though she
laughed. “Why, what nonsense!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Is it?” Harlan said, and now agitation became
evident in his own voice, though he controlled it
manfully. “It’s what I’ve always been afraid of,
myself.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, no!” she cried, her colour still deepening.
“That’s just nonsense!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Is it?” he repeated grimly. “My grandmother
Savage didn’t think so. She cut Dan off with a
shilling because she hoped Lena would leave him and
give him a chance to marry you—eventually!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Harlan Oliphant! What on earth are you talking
about?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I think you understand me,” he said. “Grandmother
was a shrewd old lady, and as good a judge
of character as one often sees; but sometimes she
overshot the mark, as most of us do, no doubt, when
we think we understand other people so thoroughly
that we can manipulate their destinies. She thought
a good deal that was true about Lena; but she despised
her too much, and made the mistake of thinking
her purely mercenary. That’s why I was the
residuary legatee, Martha.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Of all the nonsense!” she protested, and continued
to protest. She’d never heard anything so
far-fetched in all her life, she declared—people didn’t
put such Machiavellian subtleties into their wills;
and Harlan was a creative romanticist instead of the
critic she’d always believed him to be. But his romancing
wasn’t successful; it was too incredible.</p>

<p class="pindent">He listened, skeptically marking the difference
between the vehemence of the words she used and
the lack of conviction in the voice that uttered them.
“Never mind, Martha,” he said at last. “I see you
believe it and agree with me.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t,” she still protested; but her tone was now
so feeble that it only proved her determined never
to make the open admission of what she denied. “It
would be too tragic.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“To think of that poor old woman——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes,” he agreed. “I’m afraid it must irritate
her now if she knows.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“To think of her——” Martha said. “Poor
thing! I mean it would be too tragic to think of
her hoping and planning such—such preposterousness!”</p>

<p class="pindent">At this Harlan looked at her so sharply, so gravely,
that he seemed to ask much more than appeared
upon the surface of his question: “But would it be
preposterous? Suppose Lena and Dan should——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Separate?” she said, as he stopped at the word.
“They never will.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But I asked you, if they should?”</p>

<p class="pindent">Martha shook her head, smiling faintly; and she
looked away from him—far away, it seemed—as she
spoke. “People don’t stay ardently in love forever,
Harlan. I don’t suppose anybody stays in love with
anybody—forever. I think I used to believe I’d
always be in love with Dan, and in a way that was
true—whatever is left in me of the girl I used to be
will always be in love with the boy he used to be.
But I don’t know where that boy is any more. Do
you understand?”</p>

<p class="pindent">Harlan looked melancholy, as he nodded. “I
suppose so.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I mean I’m true to my memory of him, perhaps.
I’m afraid I don’t know just what I do mean.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’m afraid I do, though,” he said. “I’m afraid
it’s only that you’re hurt with him because Lena
frightened him into keeping from even stepping over
here for a minute to say, ‘Welcome home.’ ”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No; it didn’t hurt—not exactly,” she returned.
“But he does seem changed.” She frowned. “Do
you think he’s lost something, Harlan? Is it something—something
fine about him—that’s lost? It
seems to me—it seems to me there must be. How
could anybody expect a man to go through such a
struggle for success as the one he’s been through and
not bear the marks of it? Or maybe is it only his
youthfulness he’s lost?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t see anything missing,” Harlan replied.
“He’s certainly not lost his optimistic oratory; he
can still out-talk any man in town on the subject of
Our Glorious Future. In fact, I think he’s even more
that way than he used to be. Years ago he may have
shown a few very faint traces of having been through
a university, but you could sandpaper him to powder
now and not find them: I don’t believe he could translate
the first sentence of Cæsar, or ‘<span class="it">Arma, virumque
cano</span>!’ The only things he ever talks about are his
business and his boy and local politics. I think that’s
all he <span class="it">can</span> talk about.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Whereas,” Martha said, with a flash of the old
championing, “the learned Mr. Harlan Oliphant has
only to open his mouth in order to destroy a lonely
woman’s whole joy in the Italian Renaissance.”</p>

<p class="pindent">He lifted his hands, protesting, then dropped them
in despair. “So I’ve lost it already!” he said. “And
lost it in the old, old way!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Lost what?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Hope,” he explained. “You see I’m years and
years older than Freddie Oliphant, and he was complaining
to me the other day;—he’s now considered
so much ‘one of the older men’ that some of the
pretty young things one sees at the Country Club
were leaving him out of their festivities. You see
where that puts <span class="it">me</span>. So I hoped that when you came
home——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, I hoped that maybe you and I shouldn’t
quarrel any more, and——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Quarrel? No; we mustn’t, indeed!” she said.
“What else is there left for left-overs to do but to
make the best of each other?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Nothing else, I’m afraid.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“And I’d hoped,” he went on a little nervously;—“I’d
hoped maybe you’d let me see you a good deal—that
you’d let me take you places and——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Good gracious!” Martha cried; and she laughed
and blushed. “Haven’t you just taken me to
church? Aren’t you already taking me places,
Harlan?”</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XXII</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="dropcap">M</span>ARTHA had said that Dan’s remaining
away “didn’t hurt—not exactly”; and
by this she meant to give Harlan the impression
that she was less than hurt; but such a denial,
thus qualified, means in truth more than hurt. She
was a “big Western woman,” but she could be sensitive,
and had her resentments and her smallnesses.
Perhaps she was not quite genuinely sorry to believe
that the old friend who neglected to bid her welcome
home had begun to look almost middle-aged and
seemed to have lost something fine that he had possessed
in his youth. There were characteristic possessions
of his that he had not lost, however; he had
even acquired more of them, as she discovered one
evening a few weeks after the Sunday noon when
little Henry tore her dress.</p>

<p class="pindent">Mr. Shelby had come home from his office in a state
of irritability, which he made audible even before he
entered the house; and from her windows upstairs
she heard him denouncing his old negro driver.
There had been a thunderstorm earlier in the afternoon,
but that was no excuse—“not a dog-gone <span class="it">bit</span> of
excuse!” Mr. Shelby declared—for a carriage to be
“all so sploshed-over with mud that a decent man’d
be ashamed to get caught dead in it!” And he
seemed to resent the fat old servitor’s wheezy explanation
that the mud was the work of a malevolent
motor-car. “Cain’t go nowhur them automob’les
ain’ goin’ to git you these days! I had my carri’ge
all spick-an’-span. Automob’le come zimmin’ by
jes’ as we turn onto the avenoo. ‘Splickety-splick-splash!’
she say, an’ <span class="it">zoosh!</span> jes’ look at my nice clean
carri’ge solid mud! No, suh, Mist’ Shelby; I had my
carri’ge all wash up fresh. Nasty ole automob’le
spoil ev’ything! No, suh, I——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Gee-mun-nent-ly!” Martha heard her father exclaim.
“What you tryin’ to do? <span class="it">Talk</span> me to death?
I already heard enough talk in my office for one day,
thank you! By Cripey, you stop that eternal gab o’
yours and get those horses into the barn and sponge
their mouths out! Hear me?”</p>

<p class="pindent">He came into the house and could be heard muttering
snappishly to himself on the stairway, as he
ascended to his room to “wash his face and hands for
dinner.” But at the table he proved that soap and
water were ineffective, at least to remove bitterness
from a face; and he found fault with everything.
The most unbearable of his troubles finally appeared
to be put upon him by the salt, which the
humidity of the weather had affected. “I s’pose
this is the way you keep house in Italy!” he said.
“Nothin’ but smell and deggeredation over there
anyway—they prob’ly don’t care whether they can
get salt out o’ their saltcellars or not. But in this
country, in a decent man’s house, he’d like to see at
least one saltcellar on his table that’d <span class="it">work</span>!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It’s apt to be like that in hot weather after
a rain,” Martha returned placidly. “What went
wrong at the office this afternoon, papa?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Nothin’!” he said fiercely. “What’s my office
got to do with wet salt? Why can’t you ever learn
to keep some connection between your thoughts?
Geemunently!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“So you had a good day, did you, papa?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It would ’a’ been,” he replied angrily, “if it
hadn’t been for a fool friend o’ yours!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Somebody I’m responsible for?” she inquired
with a genial sarcasm that exasperated him into attempted
mockery—for when he was angriest with
her he would repeat something she said, and, to point
the burlesque, would speak in a tinny and whining
falsetto which he seemed to believe was a crushing
imitation of his daughter’s voice. “ ‘Somebody I’m
responsible for?’ ” he squeaked, using this form of
reprisal now. “No; it ain’t somebody you’re responsible
for!” Here he fell back upon downright
ferocity. “Doggone him! Somebody <span class="it">better</span> be responsible
for him!”</p>

<p class="pindent">At this Martha made a good guess. “Dan
Oliphant!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, ma’am! And I came within just one o’
throwin’ him out o’ my office! Stood up there and
grinned at me in front o’ my own desk and told me
what I had to do! What I <span class="it">had</span> to do!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“And <span class="it">do</span> you have to, papa?” she asked.</p>

<p class="pindent">“What!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I only wondered——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, plague take him, I never saw the beat of
it!” he went on, disregarding her. “Walked right
into my office and told me I had to run my car line
all the way across his Addition. Told me I <span class="it">had</span> to!
I told him we <span class="it">were</span> goin’ almost to the edge of it and
that’d be every last speck o’ the way we’d move until
he does the right thing.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Until he does what ‘right thing,’ papa?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Until he quits bein’ a hog!” the old man returned
violently. “He seems to think the best men in this
town got nothin’ on earth to do but spend their time
buildin’ up his property for him and makin’ it more
valuable, all for <span class="it">his</span> benefit. I told him when he was
ready to act like a decent man and reorganize his
holdings with a good trust company’s advice, and
issue stock, and let somebody else <span class="it">in</span>, we might talk
to him and not before.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What did Dan say?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Said he tried to get us in at the start, and now we
could go plum <span class="it">to</span>! Said I’d put that car line through
there whether I wanted to or not. Threatened me
with a petition of his lot owners, and said they were
liable to go before the legislature and get my charter
annulled, if I didn’t do it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Was he angry, papa?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Angry? No!” Mr. Shelby vociferated. “What
in continental did <span class="it">he</span> have to be angry about? <span class="it">I</span>
was the one that was angry. He stood up there and
laughed and bragged about what he was goin’ to do
till you’d thought he’d bust with the gas of it! Why,
Great Geemunently!—you’d thought this whole
city’s got nothin’ to do but turn in and run around
doin’ what Ornaby Addition says it’s got to! I says,
‘Yes!’ I says. ‘So from now on the tail’s goin’ to
wag the dog, is it?’ ‘I don’t know but it might,’ he
says. ‘This town’s done considerable laughin’ at
me,’ he says. ‘I expect it’s about time I did some
laughin’ myself,’ he says. ‘You’ll have to look out
for your charter, Mr. Shelby,’ he says.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Martha ventured to continue her naïveté, and unfortunately
carried it too far. “And <span class="it">will</span> you have to
look out for it, papa?” she asked gently.</p>

<p class="pindent">With his thin but hard old fist he struck the table
a blow that jarred the china and jingled the silver.
“Haven’t you got any <span class="it">sense</span>?” he shouted. “I’ll
show him who he’s talkin’ to! There’s a <span class="it">few</span> men
left in this town that’ll teach him a little before he
gets through with ’em! I’m not the only one he
thinks he can lay down the law to.” He glared at
her, his small gray face flushing with his increased
anger. “Are <span class="it">you</span> still standin’ up for him after the
way he’s treated you?”</p>

<p class="pindent">This took Martha’s breath, and for an instant she
was at a loss. Never before had her father seemed
to notice how she was “treated”—by anybody. “I
don’t know what you—I don’t know what you
mean,” she said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Don’t you?” he returned sharply, and, before the
bright stare of his angry eyes, her own troubled gaze
fell. “You say you don’t know what I mean?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why—no. Not—not at all,” she murmured.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, <span class="it">I</span> do!” And with a brief shot of breath
between his almost closed lips, he further expressed
an emotion that remained enigmatic to her. He
rose. “Seems to me it’s about time you quit standin’
up for him,” he said; and stalked out of the room,
leaving her still at the table.</p>

<p class="pindent">She sat there in an attitude of some rigidity after
she had heard him go upstairs, and she continued to
sit there, though she had finished her dinner before
he departed. The conclusion she reached in her
thoughts was that there was a question she would
never ask him;—she would never ask him what he
had meant by that final remark of his. She hoped
he meant only that her pride ought to resent a neighbour’s
failure to come to say he was glad to see her at
home again—but she feared her father meant more
than this. She feared he meant much more, and she
so feared it that she would never dare to ask him.</p>

<p class="pindent">Yet she wondered why she wouldn’t dare. How
could it ever be “about time” for her to stop standing
up for an old friend? And when Harlan was announced
to her, as she sat alone at the table, she rose
with a little sigh. She did not sigh because she was
sorry he had come; it was because she had just realized
how much more his brother was still the heart
of her thoughts than was this faithful and constant
escort.</p>

<p class="pindent">For she and Harlan had already fallen into a relation
not uncommon among those she had spoken of as
“left-overs”: a relation that becomes a habit—a
habit that in turn becomes a relation. She “went
everywhere” with him; and continued to go everywhere
with him; and so, after a while, their contemporaries,
all married, never sent an invitation to
one without including the other. Then, as time
went on, and the habit continued and continued, it
became common stock in the prattle of more dashing
and precipitous younger people. When talk languished
and even weather stencils failed to cover a
blank, those who felt such covering a necessity could
always fall back on this, and wonder why the two
didn’t “get married and be done with it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">In that manner a worn woman-of-the-world, aged
twenty, complained to Frederic Oliphant one evening
at the Country Club, as he sat with her after
unsuccessfully attempting an imported dance he
found himself too old to learn. “You aren’t too old
to learn it, if you wouldn’t insist on being too polite
to hold a girl as tight as these boys do,” the woman-of-the-world
informed him with the new frankness
then becoming fashionable. “You aren’t as old as
your cousin Harlan. Why on earth don’t he and
Miss Shelby get married and be done with it?
They’ve certainly been just the same as engaged for
almost as long as I can remember. Everybody says
they <span class="it">must</span> be engaged—by this time! They say she
used to be in love with his brother. I don’t see how
anybody could be in love with <span class="it">him</span>!”</p>

<p class="pindent">She glanced through an archway, near by, to where
Dan and his wife and Martha and Harlan and a
dozen other people were gravely straggling out of the
dining-room; all of this party having the air of concluding
a festival that had not proved too hilarious.
Dan, in particular, appeared to have thought the
occasion a solemn one. He had been placed next to
Martha; and she remarked cheerfully that it was the
first time he had been so near her “in ages.” After
that, however, she found little more to say to him,
since he seemed to encounter certain definite difficulties
in saying anything to her in return.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I <span class="it">am</span> coming in to—to call, some evening,” he
stammered, laughing uncomfortably to express his
cordiality. “I’d have been to see you—I’d have
been over oftener, except——” He paused, then
concluded his ill-fated excuses hurriedly—“except
I’m so busy these days.” And he glanced uneasily
across the table to where Lena sat smiling mysteriously
at him.</p>

<p class="pindent">Martha thought it tactful, and the part of a true
friend, to talk to Harlan, who sat next to her on the
other side.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XXIII</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="dropcap">‟H</span>OW in the world did that cunning little wife
of his ever fall in love with him?” Frederic’s
companion inquired, watching the
emerging procession of the dining party. “He always
looks as if he had something else on his mind when
he’s with women—as if he didn’t think they’re worth
talkin’ to. She looks about half his age. Of course
you can’t tell, though; everybody uses so much
makeup nowadays. They say she belongs to awf’ly
important people in New York and never liked it here
because she couldn’t get enough music. You didn’t
answer my question: Aren’t they ever goin’ to get
married? I mean your cousin Harlan and that big
Miss Shelby. How in the world do they find anything
to <span class="it">say</span> to each other? Gosh, if I kept a man
hangin’ on that long I’d certainly be talked out!
How in the world can two people <span class="it">stand</span> seein’ each
other all the time like that?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I can comprehend the gentleman’s half of it,”
said the gallant Frederic. “I believe Miss Shelby
goes abroad for a few months now and then to make
her own share of the association more endurable.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Martha had been at home only a week, in fact,
after one of these excursions; though she did not make
them for the reason set forth by Frederic Oliphant,
who was now much given to the reading of eighteenth-century
French memoirs and the polishing of
his diction. She went, she airily explained to Harlan,
to gather materials that would enable her to
defend the Renaissance; but as he drove home with
her from the dinner at the Country Club, this evening,
he observed that the materials she had gathered
impressed him as “about as deep into the twentieth
century as mechanics and upholsterers were able to
go.” His allusion was to the expensive closed car
she had brought from Paris;—her old bit of hickory,
impossible to be bent an atom’s width in business,
yielded with no more than a faint squeak when his
daughter was lavish with herself. “Spend what you
plague-taken want to,” he said, “so long as you
don’t ask <span class="it">me</span> to ride in the devilish contrapshun!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“He says he’ll stick to his horses and our old
carriage until they’re ‘chased off the road,’ ” Martha
told Harlan, on this homeward drive. “It doesn’t
seem to me that’s so far ahead. Why hasn’t Dan
ever done anything about the motor-car factory he
was going to build?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“He has,” Harlan said, and laughed. “In talk
he has, that is! He’s been talking about it for years,
almost as much as he has about Ornaby.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Then why doesn’t he——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Still dancing on the tight-rope!” Harlan laughed.
“He’s got his car line through the Addition—I
understand your father explodes completely whenever
it’s mentioned to him—but Dan’s spending fortunes
on new streets and sewers and what not. He’s
actually trying to open a big tract still farther out,
north of Ornaby; and I don’t believe he’s able to keep
money in his hands long enough to go into building
cars. You’d <span class="it">think</span> he’s building them though, if
you’d listen to him! He talks about the ‘Ornaby
Car’ to everybody; I suppose he believes it’s a lucky
name. He <span class="it">has</span> got his Addition booming though—no
question. He’s making the countryside more and
more horrible every day. It’s much worse than it
was last year.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“How is it horrible?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I could tell you, but it’s ten to one that if I merely
told you, you’d become Ornaby’s defender—you’re
so everlastingly its defender! I’d rather show you,
if you’d take me as a passenger in this jewelled palanquin
of yours to-morrow.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Martha assented, and the next afternoon her neat
young mechanic drove them northward over the
road once travelled on a hot and threatening morning
by a “rubber-tired runabout” in which sat a disappointed
little bride and a perplexed bridegroom. On
that dusty morning, already of the long ago, the
way had soon become rustic; the cedar-block paving,
itself worn and jolty, had stopped short not much
more than a mile from its beginning; then came
macadam, but not for long; and then the rough
country road, leading north between the great flat
fields of corn and wheat to where it became a slough
in winter, and tall grass and even ironweed grew
between the ruts in summer—for there it reached the
soggy and tangled groves of Ornaby.</p>

<p class="pindent">But on this brisk autumn afternoon, the crystal
and enamel of the silent French car went glistening
serenely along a level white way of asphalt. The
fields, above which the troubled bride and groom
had seen rising the clouds of the summer storm, were
fields no longer; for here was bungalow-land, acres
and acres of bungalows, with brick groceries and
drug stores at some of the street corners, and two or
three wooden church spires slenderly asserting their
right to look down on all the rest. Cross streets gave
glimpses of trolley cars on other north-and-south
thoroughfares; great brick schoolhouses, unbearably
plain, were to be seen, and a few apartment buildings,
not made more beautiful by pinchbeck torturing of
their façades.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Of course Dan has no responsibility for this
particular awfulness,” Harlan explained. “Without
rime or reason the town just decided to grow, and
luckily for him it’s grown faster out this northern
way than it has in any other direction. Some people
seem to think he performed an enchantment to make
it do it, but it just happened.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It seems to happen faster and faster,” Martha
observed. “The last time I drove out this far was in
our old carriage with papa, not quite a year ago, I
think; and there were dozens of vacant lots; but
now there are hardly any. The asphalt wasn’t
finished clear into Ornaby then, though Dan had
built a fine road through. I suppose now——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, yes; now he’s got asphalt on his cross streets,
too; and the southern part of Ornaby is so like this
you couldn’t tell when you get into it, if it weren’t for
the disasters he calls his signboards. Look at that!”</p>

<p class="pindent">As they spoke the swift car had brought them into
a region where there was more vacant ground; and
the little houses, nearly all of wood, were not so
closely crowded. On a stretch of weedy land, rising
slightly above new cement sidewalks, there smote
the eye a painted wooden wall two hundred feet long.
With enormous yellow words on a black background
the thing not only staggered the vision of a passer-by,
but seemed to bellow in his ear: “You Are Now
Entering Ornaby Addition! Build a Home in Ornaby
the Beautiful! Every Ornaby Buyer is an
Ornaby Booster.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Beyond came a region of more bungalows: “Homes
Beautiful of Ornaby the Beautiful” another bellowing
signboard declared them to be; and, not blushing
in the very presence of the dwellings and dwellers it
thus made proclamation for, went on to insist once
more upon the enthusiasm necessarily a consequence
in the bosom of any one who became an “Ornaby
Buyer.” There was a briskness about the place:
children went busily roller-skating over the new
sidewalks; clotheslines were flying their Monday
white pennants on the breeze; other bungalows were
noisily getting themselves built, and farther on were
some white cottages;—“quite pretty,” Martha said
they were. Beyond them the open spaces were
broader, and the little houses more infrequent; but
the asphalt street went on, with numbered white
posts marking the building lots, paved cross streets
running to right and left into thicket-bordered distances,
and Dan’s great signboards shouting along
the front of untouched acres of old forest.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You see for yourself,” Harlan said. “This <span class="it">was</span>
beautiful before ‘Ornaby the Beautiful’ insulted the
landscape. But now, with all these flimsy and
dreadful bungalows and the signboards screeching at
the trees——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes,” she interrupted, “but he’s spared all the
trees he could, even back there where the bungalows
and little houses were so thick. And I noticed the
people were planting shrubberies and trying to make
little gardens grow. It might be really very pretty
some day. And just here——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, here,” Harlan said, “where he hasn’t touched
it yet, it’s well enough, of course. But you’ll
find it’s only a question of time till he spoils it, though
I understand he intends this to be what he calls a
’restricted residence district.’ ”</p>

<p class="pindent">The paved street ran between tall woods now; the
numbered lots were broad, and the car passed a few
proudly marked “Sold.” Then Martha noticed one
that was several hundred feet wide, and in depth
extended indefinitely into a grove of magnificent
beech trees. Stone pillars gave entrance upon a
partly completed driveway that disappeared round
an evergreen thicket, not long planted. “What a
pleasant place to live! It’s getting so smoky in town
it seems to me people will have to be moving out even
this far some day. Whose place is that?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Dan’s,” Harlan said, with his dry laugh. “At
least he says he plans to build there sometime. I
don’t think Lena cares about it much! I heard
her speaking of it as ‘out at the end of Nowhere.’
One of the interesting things about my sister-in-law,
to me, is the fact that she’s really never wanted
a house of her own. She’s never once proposed
such a thing in all this time, I believe, but goes
on living with father and mother; and year after
year passes without altering that air of hers of being
only temporarily marooned in what she still calls ‘the
West.’ ”</p>

<p class="pindent">Martha looked serious, but said nothing, and he
spoke to the chauffeur, who turned westward at the
next cross street. At the end of a block it ceased to
be a street and became a newly gravelled road, a
transformation that interested Harlan. “Funny!”
he said. “I was out this way a couple of months
ago and this was a dirt road with a good deal of grass
on it. Now he’s had it gravelled. It leads over to
the west side of his land, where he laid out the site
for his factory, years ago. I thought you might like
to see that.”</p>

<p class="pindent">But before they approached the site of Dan’s factory,
they passed a long line of trucks and wagons
bound their way; wagon after wagon laden with
bricks, and truck loads of lumber, of drainage tile, of
steel girders and of cement, and there were great-wheeled
carriers of stone. As they came closer they
saw that many two-story double houses for workmen
and their families were being built on both sides of
the road; and, beyond these, long lines of brick walls
were rising, broken into regular open oblongs where
the ample glass of a modern factory building was to
be set.</p>

<p class="pindent">“By George!” Harlan exclaimed, surprised almost
to the point of dismay. “He <span class="it">is</span> going it! Why, he’s
got the thing half up!” And he said, “By George!”
again, seeing the figure of his brother on a section of
roof and outlined against the sky. “There he is—and
in his element!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You mean in the sky?” Martha asked, her eyes
brightening.</p>

<p class="pindent">“No; I mean hustling. Keeping everybody on
the jump while he defaces the landscape some more!
That’s his element, isn’t it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan was indeed in that element and it was truly
his. He could be seen waving his arms at the
workmen; shouting to foremen; running along the
roof and calling to teamsters, instructing them where
to dump their loads. His voice was audible to the
occupants of the French car that stopped for a few
moments in the road; and they became aware that
he addressed the workmen, both white and coloured,
by their first names or their nicknames exclusively;
his shoutings were all to “Jim” or “Mike” or
“Shorty” or “Tony” or “Gumbo.”</p>

<p class="pindent">A moment after the car stopped, a smaller figure
climbed up the slope of the low roof and joined the
towering and bulky one on the ridge. “He’s got my
charming-mannered nephew with him,” Harlan said.
“What time he can spare from spoiling the landscape
he puts into spoiling Henry!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Is that Henry?” Martha asked incredulously;
then, as she saw Dan put his right arm about the
boy’s shoulder, guarding him carefully from a misstep,
she replied to herself. “Yes, it really is.
Gracious, how time runs away from us!”</p>

<p class="pindent">Turning to shout at some one in their direction,
Dan saw them, and waved his free arm cordially in
greeting; but he made no motion as if to descend,
and went on immediately with his shouting to the
men. Martha said, “We’ll go now,” to the chauffeur;
and the car instantly moved forward.</p>

<p class="pindent">She leaned back, smiling. “He’s in his glory,” she
said. “It all goes on arriving, Harlan. His great
days have come!”</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XXIV</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="dropcap">S</span>HE was right; the growth was now visibly
upon the pleasant and substantial town,
where all had once appeared to be so settled
and so finished; for, just as with some of man’s disorders
that develop slowly, at first merely hinting in
mild prophetic symptoms, then becoming more sinister,
and attacking one member after another until the
whole body writhes and alters, so it is with this disorder
that comes racking the midland towns through
distortions and turmoil into the vaster likenesses of
cities: haphazard and insignificant destructions begin
casually, but gradually grow more sweeping and more
violent until the victim town becomes aware of great
crashings;—and then lies choking in a cloud of dust
and smoke wherein huge new excrescences appear.</p>

<p class="pindent">Cameras of the new age sometimes record upon
strips of moving film the slow life of a plant from the
seed to the blossoming of its flower; and then there is
thrown upon the screen a picture in which time is so
quickened that the plant is seen in the very motions
of its growth, twisting itself out of the ground and
stretching and swelling to its maturity, all within a
few minutes. So might a film record be made of the
new growth bringing to full life a quiet and elderly
midland town; but the picture would be dumfounding.
Cyclone, earthquake, and miracle would seem
to stalk hand-in-hand upon the screen; thunder and
avalanche should play in the orchestra pit.</p>

<p class="pindent">In such a picture, block after block of heavy old
mansions would be seen to topple; row on row of
stout buildings would vanish almost simultaneously;
families would be shown in flight, carrying away their
goods with them from houses about to crumble; miles
of tall trees would be uprooted; the earth would gape,
opening in great holes and long chasms;—the very
streets would unskin themselves and twist in agony;
every landmark would fly dispersed in powder upon
the wind, and all old-established things disappear.</p>

<p class="pindent">Such a picture would be but the truth with time
condensed;—that is to say, the truth made like a
man’s recollection of events—and yet it would not
be like the truth as the truth appeared to Daniel
Oliphant and the other men who made the growth,
nor like their subsequent memories. For these men
saw, not the destruction, but only the city they were
building; and they shouted their worship of that
vision and were exultant in the uproar. They
shouted as each new skyscraper rose swimming
through the vast drifts of smoke, and shouted again
as the plain, clean, old business streets collapsed
and the magnificent and dirty new ones climbed
above the ruins. They shouted when business went
sweeping outward from its centre, tearing away the
houses where people had lived contentedly for so
long; and they shouted again as the new factory
suburbs marched upon the countryside, far and
wide, and the colossal black plumes of new chimneys
went undulating off into a perpetual smoke-mist, so
that the distant level plain seemed to be a plain surrounding
not a city, but an ever-fuming volcano.</p>

<p class="pindent">Once again, in the interminably cycling repetition
of the new displacing the old, then becoming the old
and being displaced in turn, an old order was perishing.
The “New Materialism” that had begun to
grow with the renewed growing of the country after
the Civil War, and staggered under the Panic of ’73,
but recovered and went on growing egregiously, had
become an old materialism now. It had done great
things and little things. Amongst the latter, it had
furnished Europe with a caricature type of the
American—the “successful American business man.”
On the shelf, beside the figure of the loud-tweeded
Boxing Briton with his “side whiskers,” Europe set
the lank-and-drawling, chin-bearded, palace-buying
Boaster of the Almighty Dollar, the Yankee of the
great boom period.</p>

<p class="pindent">That had been a great railroad-making and
railroad-breaking period; the great steel period; the
great oil period; the great electric-invention period;
the great Barnum-and-Bunkum period; the period of
“corrupt senators”; of reform; and of skyscrapers
thirty stories high. All this was old now, routed by
a newer and more gorgeous materialism. The old
had still its disciplines for the young and its general
appearance of piety; bad children were still whipped
sometimes, and the people of best reputation played
no games on Sunday, but went to church and seemed
to believe in God and the Bible with almost the faith
of their fathers. But many of these people went
down with their falling houses; a new society, swarming
upward above the old surfaces, became dominant.
It began to breed, among other things, a new
critic who attacked every faith, and offered, instead
of mysteries, full knowledge of all creation as merely
a bit of easily comprehended mechanics. And in
addition to discovering the secret of the universe, the
new society discovered golf, communism, the movies,
and the turkey trot; it spread the great American
cocktail over the whole world, abolished horses, and
produced buildings fifty stories high.</p>

<p class="pindent">. . . The slow beginnings of the new growth
in the town had been imperceptible except to a few
exuberant dreamers—the most persistent somnambulist
of whom was Dan Oliphant—but now that the
motion was daily more visible to all men, there was
no stopping it. Hard times and prosperity were all
one to it;—it marched, and so did its chief herald and
those who went shouting before it with him, while
the “old conservative business men,” the Shelbys and
Rowes and John P. Johnses, sat shaking their heads
and muttering “Gamblers!”</p>

<p class="pindent">Gamblers, or destroying angels, or prophets, whatever
they were, they went trampling forward in
thunder and dust. The great Sheridan, of the Trust
Company and the Pump Works, had joined them.
Unscrupulous and noisiest of the noisy, he was like a
war band drumming and brassily trumpeting with
the vanguard. There was Eugene Morgan who had
begun building the “Morgan Car” when automobiles
were a joke, and now puffed forth from his long lanes
of shops black smoke that trailed off unendingly to
the horizon that it dimmed. Pendleton, of the new
“Pendleton Tractor,” marched with these, and old
Sam Kohn and Sol Kohn and Sam Kohn, Junior—the
Kohns were tearing down the Amberson Block,
the very centre and business temple of the old town,
the corner of National Avenue and First Street—and
there were the Rosenberg Brothers, apartment
builders who would buy and obliterate half a dozen
solid old houses at a time. There were the Schmidts,
the Reillys, the younger Johnsons, third generation
of the old firm of Abner Johnson’s Sons, and there
were the Caldinis, the Comiskeys, and the Hensels,
as well as all the never-resting optimists who had
come to the town from farms and villages to blast
it into nothingness and build their own city and
build themselves into it.</p>

<p class="pindent">In the din of all the tearing down and building up,
most of the old family names were not heard, or
were heard but obscurely, or perhaps in connection
with misfortunes; for many of the old families were
vanishing. They and their fathers and grandfathers
had slowly made the town; they had always thought
of it as their own, and they had expected to sit looking
out upon it complacently forever from the plate
glass of their big houses on National Avenue and the
two other streets parallel to the avenue and nearest
it. They had built thick walls round themselves,
these “old families,” not only when they built the
walls of their houses, but when they built the walls
encircling their close association with one another.
The growth razed all these walls; the “sets” had resisted
the “climbers,” but the defences fell now;
and those who had sheltered behind them were dispersed,
groping for one another in the smoke.</p>

<p class="pindent">It was Dan Oliphant who began the destruction
of National Avenue. Among the crumbling families
were the Vertreeses;—they retired to what was left
of their country estate, which had already been overtaken
by the expanding town and compressed to half
an acre. Dan bought the old Vertrees Mansion on
National Avenue, tore it down and built upon its site
a tremendous square box of concrete fronted with
glass—the “sales building” of the “Ornaby Four, the
Car of Excellent Service.” This was just across the
street from where his grandmother had lived, and
Harlan protested long and loudly; but Dan was too
busy to give his brother a complete attention. He
said mildly that his new building seemed at least
an improvement upon the shabby boarding-house,
which the Vertrees Mansion had become when he
bought it; and, when Harlan hotly denied the improvement,
Dan sat listening with an expression of
indulgence, the while occupying his mind with computations
concerning other matters.</p>

<p class="pindent">For, as Martha had felt, these were his great days,
and he was “in on” everything. The Earl of
Ornaby was earl of more than Ornaby now; Ornaby
and the “Ornaby Four” were but two of the adventurous
fleets he had at sea. He was “in on” a dozen
“promotions” at once; “in on” the stock of new “industrials”;
inventors and exploiters lived at his office
doors. And although all of his fellow-hustlers used
the phrase, none could say “my city” with a greater
right than he. When he began one of his boostings
with, “I believe first of all in my own city,” the
voice of a religion was heard. He was his city; he
was its spirit, and more than any other he was its
guide, and yet its slave and worshipper. He could
not speak of it except with reverence, nor go on speaking
of it long unless he made the eagle scream.</p>

<p class="pindent">He had become a juggler of money, which poured
streaming into one hand as fast as he hurled it aloft
with the other. He was one of those men of whom it
is said, “Nobody knows what he’s worth. He
couldn’t tell you, himself, to save his life!” He was
called “rich,” and sometimes he was said to be the
richest man in town. He juggled with money, with
land, with houses, with skyscrapers, and with factories,
keeping them all in the air at once; and his
brother said that even so, Dan still “danced the
tight-rope,” maintaining his balance dangerously
during the juggling. Meanwhile, as he balanced and
tossed the glittering and ponderous things through
the air, the rest of the deafening show went on; the
hustling and booming and boosting moving round
and round him in clouds of dust to the sound of brass
bands, while crowds gazed marvelling up at the juggler,
and admired and envied him.</p>

<p class="pindent">Of all the admirers who now looked up to him,
cheering, probably the most enthusiastic was his
brother-in-law, George McMillan, whom Dan had
made “General Manager of the Ornaby Four.”
George had not quite fulfilled his own prediction that
at forty he was to be a “drunken broker”; but he had
come, as he said, “near enough to it”; and he was glad
when Dan finally sent for him and his designer of a
new gasoline engine, the prospective “Ornaby Four.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It’s the greatest idea in the world,” George told
his sister. “It’s cheap, but not the cheapest; it
doesn’t compete with the commonest little cars, nor,
on the other hand, with even the moderately expensive
ones. It’s got a place of its own in between,
where there are millions of people that can afford a
little better car than the cheapest, but wouldn’t
dream of a luxurious one like the ‘Morgan.’ It was
an inspiration of Dan’s to set the price of the ‘Ornaby’
at eight hundred and eighty-five dollars. I like the
sense of adventure you get in a game like this. I like
getting out of my New York, and I like the way
things move in a place so friendly as this. It’s immensely
alive, but somehow it does manage to be
friendly, too. I don’t understand why you’ve always
hated it so.”</p>

<p class="pindent">She explained that she had hated it less when she
was in Europe, where she had at last got her year,
having taken young Henry with her in spite of her
husband’s strong protest. The mother and son had
just returned. “I think I could stand the place perfectly
well, George,” she said, “if I were quite sure I’d
never have to see it again!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But don’t you begin to understand <span class="it">yet</span> what a
husband you’ve got?” George cried. “Why, he’s a
great man, Lena!”</p>

<p class="pindent">Lena laughed and looked at him pityingly; but
contented herself with that for argument. To her
mind Dan was not made great by becoming the great
figure of a city that was merely growing larger,
noisier, and dirtier. She had never cared for anything
but Beauty, she said; and, to her mind, as to
that of the fastidious Harlan, Dan was only helping
to increase hideousness; so she joined her brother-in-law
in habitually referring to “Ornaby the Beautiful”
as “Ornaby the Horrible.” Moreover, although
she had never manifested any interest in National
Avenue before its destruction began, she became almost
vehement upon the subject of its merit as the
razing of its old houses continued; and Harlan was
again in agreement with her here.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You and Eugene Morgan and that rascally old
Sheridan and your Jew friends are doing an awful
thing,” he said to Dan at a family dinner. “You’re
ruining the one decent thing the city possessed—a
splendid, dignified old street. It’s happening all over
the country—one doesn’t need half an hour in New
York to see that Fifth Avenue is ruined; but I did
think we might have escaped here. I doubt if it
would ever have occurred to Morgan to put up his
awful sales building—with a repair shop in it!—on
National Avenue, if you hadn’t done it first. Then
the others thought they had to follow; and if something
isn’t done to stop you fellows, the whole avenue
will be nothing but a mile row of motor-car sales
buildings and pneumatic tire warehouses and garages—a
market!—and with hundred-foot smoke-stacks!
It may reach even here to our old house and the Shelbys’;
and already you’ve made the peaceful neighbourhood
around <span class="it">my</span> house horrible. I’d like to know what
grandma Savage would have said about the things
you people have done to this town! Why, you’ve
made National Avenue begin to look like an old pipe-smoking
hag’s mouth with every other tooth missing
and the rest sticking up all black in the smoke.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan laughed absent-mindedly, but remained impervious.
Like the ardent Sheridan, he loved the
smoke, called it “Prosperity,” and drew his lungs full
of it, breathing in it the glory of his city. More and
more, the city became his city, and with all his juggling
and tight-rope dancing he found time to be
mayor of it for a year, and to begin the “Park
System” that was afterwards to bring so much beauty
to it. One day he drove his father over the ground
he had planned to include in this chain of groves
and meadows; and he was glad afterwards that they
had made the excursion together.</p>

<p class="pindent">“It’ll be a great thing for the city,” his father said,
as Dan’s car turned homeward with them. “It’s a
great thing for you to do and to be remembered by.
You were a good boy, Dan; and you’re a good man
and a good citizen. You serve your fellow-men well,
I think.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan laughed, a little embarrassed by this praise;
but although Mr. Oliphant perceived his son’s embarrassment,
he had more to say, and went on with
something like timidity, yet with a gentle persistence:
“I’d like to tell you another thing, Dan. It’s something
your mother and I never felt we ought to talk
about to you, but I believe I’ll mention it to you to-day.
We—you see your mother and I have always
thought there’s a danger sometimes in letting a person
see that you sympathize with him, because it
might make him feel that he’s unhappy, or in trouble,
whereas, if you just leave him to himself he may go
on cheerfully enough and never think about it. But
I <span class="it">would</span> like to tell you—I’d like to say——”</p>

<p class="pindent">He paused, and Dan asked: “You’d like to say
what, sir?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well—I’d like just to tell you that your mother
and I think you’ve always been as kind as you could
to Lena.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Surprised, Dan stared at him; and Mr. Oliphant
gravely and affectionately returned his look. “Yes,
sir,” the son said awkwardly. “I hope so. Thank
you, sir.” And he thought that the handsome, kind
old face seemed whiter and more fragile than usual.</p>

<p class="pindent">That was natural, Dan told himself; people
couldn’t help growing old, and they grew whiter and
thinner as age came upon them; but age didn’t
necessarily mean ill-health. For that matter, his
father hadn’t nearly reached a really venerable old
age; he was more than a decade younger than old-hickory
Shelby, who still never missed a day’s work.
Nevertheless, there had been something a little disquieting
in Mr. Oliphant’s manner; it was as if he
had thought that perhaps he might never have another
chance to say what he had said;—and that
night, on the train to which he had hurried after
their drive, Dan thought about his father often.</p>

<p class="pindent">He thought about him often, too, the next day, in
New York; and during the conferences there with
the landscape architects who were designing the new
parks, his thoughts went uneasily westward;—not to
the green stretches of grove and sward that were to
be, but to the quiet old man who had walked so slowly
between the tall white gateposts after bidding his son
good-bye. Recalling this, it seemed to Dan that he
had never before seen him walk so slowly; and he
went over in his mind, for the fiftieth time, his
father’s manner in speaking of Lena—the slight,
timid insistence, as if there might never be another
opportunity to say something he had always wished
to say. It had given what he said the air of a blessing
bestowed—and of a valedictory.</p>

<p class="pindent">Thus Dan’s vague uneasiness grew, and although
he scolded himself for it, and told himself he was
imaginative beyond reason, he could not be rid of it.
That was well for him; since such uneasiness may be
of help when life is like a path whereon tigers leap
from nowhere, as it is, sometimes;—the wayfarer will
not avoid wounds, but may better survive them for
having been in some expectance of them.</p>

<p class="pindent">For a year Mr. Oliphant’s heart had been “not
just what it ought to be”; but he told no one that
this was his physician’s report to him. Harlan’s
telegram reached New York just as Dan was starting
home. Mr. Oliphant had indeed taken his last opportunity
to say what he had so long wished to say,
for now the kind heart beat no longer;—but he had
died proud of his son.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XXV</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="dropcap">N</span>EITHER Mr. Oliphant’s daughter-in-law
nor his grandson was at home at the time
of his death. Lena had gone abroad
again, for a “three-months’ furlough,” as she called
it; and again in spite of Dan’s vehement protest
that the boy “ought to see his own country first,”
she had taken Henry with her.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I wouldn’t mind it so much,” Dan said to her
before they went;—“but you never even stop off and
show him Niagara Falls when you take him to New
York to visit your family; and when I want to take
him with <span class="it">me</span>, you always say he’s got a cold or something
and has to stay at home. It seems to me pretty
near a disgrace for parents to carry their children all
over Europe and pay no attention to the greatest
natural wonders in the world, right here at home.
My father and mother went to Europe with Harlan
and me, but not before they’d taken us to see Mammoth
Cave and Niagara Falls. Why, it’d take <span class="it">five</span>
Europes to give me the thrill I got the first time I
ever looked at the Falls! It’s not fair to Henry, and
besides, look what it does to his school work! He
picked up some French, yes, the other time you had
him over there; but he dropped a whole year in his
classes. And how much French is he goin’ to need
when I take him into business with me? Not a
thimbleful in a lifetime! He’s the best boy I ever
knew and got the finest nature; and he ought to be
given the opportunity to learn something about his
own country instead of too much Paris!”</p>

<p class="pindent">This patriotic vehemence went for nothing, since
Henry intended to accompany his mother and announced
his intentions with a firmness that left his
father nothing to do but grumble helplessly, while
Lena laughed. At fifteen, Henry had his precocities,
and among them a desire (not mentioned) to revisit
the Bal Tabarin, as he retained a pleasant memory of
a quiet excursion to this entertainment, during his previous
travels, when he was twelve and already influential
with Parisian hotel guides. Lena had her way,
and, having placed the ocean between herself and further
argument on the part of her husband, remained
twice as long as the “furlough” she had proposed.
She did not return until Dan’s term as mayor was
concluded, four months after Mr. Oliphant’s death.</p>

<p class="pindent">When she finally did arrive, her appearance was
mollifying;—she had always looked far less than her
age, and now, fresh from amazing cosmetic artists,
and brilliantly studied by superb milliners, she was
prettier than she had ever been. Strangers would
have believed a firm declaration that she was twenty-four;
she knew this, and her homecoming mood was
lively—but when Dan within the hour of her arrival
wished to drive her out to Ornaby to see the new
house, which he had at last begun to build, after
years of planting and landscaping, she declined. Her
look of gayety vanished into the faraway expression
that had always come upon her face when the new
house was mentioned.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Not to-day,” she said. “I’m not so sure we
ought to go ahead with it at all. I don’t think we
ought to leave your mother; she’d be too lonely in the
old house now—living here all alone.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But I never dreamed of such a thing,” Dan protested.
“She’ll come with us, of course. This old
place is going to be sold before long; I’ve just about
talked her into it, and she can get real money for it
now. Land along here is worth something mighty
pretty these days. Why, Fred Oliphant’s family got
seven hundred a front foot for their place three
months ago, and an absolutely magnificent office-building
for doctors is goin’ to be put up there.
They’ve got the foundations all in and the first
story’s almost up already. That’s only two blocks
below here; and I can get mother almost any price she
wants. I’d buy it myself and sell it again, only I
wouldn’t like to feel I’d taken advantage of her. Why
don’t you come on out now with Henry and me and
take a look at our own doin’s? It’ll surprise you!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, some day,” she said, the absent look not disappearing
from her eyes. “I’d rather lie down now,
I believe. You run along with Henry.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Henry showed no great enthusiasm about accompanying
his father, and when they arrived at
the new house seemed indifferent to the busy work
going on there. Dan was loud and jocose with him,
slapping him on the back at intervals, and inquiring
in a shout how it felt to “be back in God’s country
again.” Upon each of these manifestations, Henry
smiled with a politeness somewhat constrained,
replying indistinctly; and, as they went over the
building, now in a skeleton stage of structure, Dan
would stop frequently and address a workman with
hearty familiarity: “Look what I got with me,
Shorty! Just got him back all the way from Europe!
How’d <span class="it">you</span> like to have a boy as near a man as this?
Pretty fine! Yes, sir; pretty fine, Shorty!” And
he would throw his ponderous arm about his son’s
thin shoulders, and Henry would bear the embrace
with a bored patience, but move away as soon as he
could find an excuse to do so.</p>

<p class="pindent">He was a dark, slender, rather sallow boy, short for
the sixteen years he verged upon, though his face,
with its small and shapely features, like his mother’s,
looked older and profoundly reticent. It was one of
those oldish young faces that seem too experienced
not to understand the wisdom of withholding everything;
and Henry appeared to be most of all withholding
when he was with his boisterous, adoring
father. Obviously this was not because the boy had
any awe of Dan. On the contrary, as one of the
friendly and admiring carpenters observed, “The Big
Fellow, he’s so glad to have that son of his back he
just can’t keep his hands off him; wants to jest hug
him all the time, and it makes the kid tired. Well,
I can remember when I was like that—thought I
knew it all, and my old man didn’t know nothin’!
I expect this kid does know a few things the Big
Fellow doesn’t know he knows, mebbe! Looks like
that kind of a kid to me.”</p>

<p class="pindent">The estimate was not ill-founded, as Henry presently
demonstrated. Escaping from his father’s
fond and heavy arm, he seated himself upon a slab of
carved stone, produced a beautiful flat gold case, the
size and shape of a letter envelope, and drew from it
a tiny cigarette of a type made in France for women.</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan stared at him, frowned, and inquired uncomfortably,
but with some severity: “Don’t you think
you’re too young for that, Henry?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Young?” Henry seemed to be mildly surprised
as he lighted the cigarette. “No, I shouldn’t think
so. I’ve smoked for quite some time now, you
know.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No; I certainly didn’t know.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, yes,” Henry returned placidly. “It’s years
since I first began it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, but see here——” Dan began; then paused,
reddening. “I don’t believe it’ll be very good for
your health,” he concluded feebly.</p>

<p class="pindent">“My health’s all right,” the youth said, with an
air that began to be slightly annoyed. “Mother’s
known I smoked a long while.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, but——” Dan stopped again, his embarrassment
increasing and his perplexity increasing
with it as he remembered that he himself had smoked
at fifteen, surreptitiously. “Well——” he began
again, after a pause, during which Henry blew a
beautifully formed little smoke ring. “Well——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, sir?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well——” Dan said. “Well, I’m glad if you do
smoke, you do it openly, anyhow.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, sir?” Henry returned, with a slight accent
of surprise that suggested his inability to perceive
any reason for not smoking openly. Then, regarding
the incident as closed, he asked: “I suppose you’ll
put up a garage in proportion to the house, won’t
you? It’s about time I had a car of my own, don’t
you think, sir?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I expect so,” Dan said, still uncomfortable. “I
expect we’ll have to see about it before long. Anyhow,
I would rather you did it openly, Henry. I—I
don’t—I——” He stopped, in difficulties with
a depth of feeling that affected his voice. “I—I
don’t ever expect to be half as good a father to you,
Henry, as my—as my own father was to me, but I—well,
your uncle Harlan and I were afraid to smoke
before him until we were almost grown up. We used
to sneak out to the stable to smoke—or in alleys—and
though my father was so much better a man
than I am, and so much better a father to me than I
can ever hope to be to you, I guess—I guess this is
better, Henry. I mean I guess it’s better to have
you open with me, like this. It’s an advance, I expect.
I don’t know why we were afraid to smoke before
father; he never whipped us and he was the kindest
man—the best—the best father that ever——”
He was unable to continue; and Henry glanced up to
see him, red-faced and swallowing, struggling with an
emotion that made the boy wonder what in the world
was the matter with him.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I suppose he was, probably,” Henry said. “How
about that car? Don’t you think I might as well
have it pretty soon? How about this week’s being
as good as any other time?”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan recovered himself, smiled, and patted his
son’s shoulder. “I expect so, maybe. We’ll drive
down to our agents on the avenue before we go
home.”</p>

<p class="pindent">And at this Henry proved that he could still show
some animation. He sprang up, shouting. “Ya-ay!”
he cried. “<span class="it">Vive le sport!</span>” And he leaped into
the big Morgan limousine that stood waiting for
them in the cluttered driveway. “Come on!” he
shouted. “I’ll show you how to shoot a little life into
this old town!”</p>

<p class="pindent">Rising from her nap, an hour later, Lena looked
from her window and saw them returning. Henry
was still animated, talking busily, and, as they
came into the house, seemed willing to bear the
weight of his father’s arm across his shoulders. The
mother, looking down upon the pair, smiled thoughtfully
to herself;—she was not more indulgent with the
boy than his father was; but she knew that Henry
was more hers than he was his father’s. He had always
been so, because of some chord of subtle understanding
struck by her nature and Henry’s. She
had sometimes been in a temper with him when he
was a noisy little boy, but as he grew older she had
begun to feel only amusement over his naughtinesses,
because she understood them so well;—she laughed at
him sometimes, but had long since ceased to chide
him. She had no blame for him, and she knew that
he would never find fault with her, no matter what
she did. They had a mysterious comprehension of
each other—a comprehension so complete that they
had never needed to speak of it.</p>

<p class="pindent">She heard him chattering to his grandmother in
the hall downstairs, and knew by his tone that his
father had bought him something, of which the boy
would presently tell her;—she remained standing
beside the closed window, waiting for him to come in
with his news. Then, as she stood there, a gust drove
down a multitude of soot flakes from the smokestack
of an apartment house that had been built near by,
on the cross street just south of the Oliphants’, while
she was away. After the soot, which flecked the
window, the smoke itself descended, enveloping the
house so thickly that the window became opaque.
Sounds were not shut out, however, and she could
still hear all too well the chattering of a steam drill
at work across the street, where a public garage was
being built. She frowned at the noise, for the drill
had disturbed her sleep; and so had the almost unceasing
rumble of trucks passing the house; and so
had the constant yelp of automobile signals rasping
at one another for right of way.</p>

<p class="pindent">The smoke thinned out, revealing the busy street
that had been so different when she had first looked
forth upon it from this same window, a bride. She
remembered how quiet it had been then—and suddenly
she spoke aloud.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, I’m still here!”</p>

<p class="pindent">Then she laughed softly, as her eyes wandered to
the north, crossed the iron picket fence that divided
the Oliphants’ yard from the Shelbys’, and beheld the
fountain swan. He was green no longer; his colour
was that of the smoke; and though he still shot a
crystal spray, the flying water was the only clean
thing about him, or in sight.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Ridiculous old beast!” Lena said; but there was
no bitterness in her tone. It was a long time since
she had felt jealous of Martha; and, although she
often told Harlan that Martha would never marry
him, “because she still hopes Dan’ll be a widower
some day,” the warning had come to be merely
jocular, without intended sting. Moreover, she
practised the same raillery with her brother after he
had taken up his residence in the town; for George
offered himself as a rival to Harlan in the half-serious
manner of a portly bachelor of forty mildly courting a
contemporary.</p>

<p class="pindent">Lena repeated her opinion of the swan. “Ridiculous
old beast!” This time she did not murmur
the words as before; but spoke them in her mind, and
she immediately followed them with others, the
connection being made without any more feeling than
she had about the swan. Her thought was merely
speculative, even a little compassionate: “I suppose
she does still hope it, poor old thing! She thinks
maybe, if I leave him——”</p>

<p class="pindent">But Henry came in with the news of his father’s
munificence, and interrupted this thought that had
been in her mind ever since the night of Martha’s
return from the long absence in Italy. Throughout
all the long time since then, there had always been in
Lena’s mind a conviction, however obscured or half-forgotten,
that some day she would leave her husband.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XXVI</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="dropcap">S</span>HE was mistaken about Martha, who never
had the definite hope Lena’s imagination
attributed to her. Martha was steadfast because
she could not help it, having been born with this
endowment evidently; and her tenderness for the
boy she had loved so heartily was imperishable; but
the Dan Oliphant of the middle years did not seem to
her to be that boy. What she felt for the big middle-aged
man, she felt only because he had long ago been
the beloved youth; she was not in love with him,
nor with anybody. This was the explanation she
still found it necessary to make to his brother about
once a year—usually on New Year’s Day; for it was
Harlan’s habit to select that hopeful anniversary as
a good time to dwell a little upon his patience.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You call it your patience, but it became only
your habit long ago,” she told him. “It would
really unsettle you badly if I ever said I’d marry you,
Harlan; and it would unsettle you even more if I
not only said I would, but went ahead and did it.
You’d find you’d never forgive me for upsetting your
routine. If we were married, where in the world
would you ever <span class="it">go</span>? You haven’t been anywhere for
so long, except to see me, that you’d be left without
the destination you’ve been accustomed to. It’s
gallant of you to still mention your willingness, every
now and then, and I own up that I rather expect it
and should miss it if you didn’t; but if you want to
marry, you ought to look about for—well, say a pretty
widow of twenty-nine, Harlan. She’d be better for
you than one of the ‘buds,’ though you could have
whichever you chose;—they’d jump at the chance!
The trouble with me is that I’m too old—and I’m
horribly afraid I look my age.”</p>

<p class="pindent">The fear was warranted, though it need not have
been a fear. She had escaped the portliness that
seemed to threaten her at thirty, and had escaped
too far, perhaps; but her thinness was not angular;
and if she looked her age, then that age was no more
than a pleasantly responsible age, as Harlan told her,
and neither a careworn nor a gray-haired age. In
fact, it must be the perfect age, he said—and he
wondered if it mightn’t be as kind as it looked, and
be the perfect age for him.</p>

<p class="pindent">At that, she became more serious. “I’m surprised
at myself every year I grow older,” she said. “I’m
so much more romantic than I was at twenty, and it
seems I keep growing more so. At twenty how I’d
have laughed if I’d heard of a woman of forty who
said she couldn’t marry because she was in love with
no one! I suppose what would have struck me as
funniest would have been the idea of a woman of
forty talking about marrying at all.”</p>

<p class="pindent">She was “in love with no one,” but she could still
be Harlan’s brother’s champion, if need arose; and
after George McMillan took up his residence in the
town, and began his mild rivalry, she had this amiable
bachelor to second her. Moreover, it is to be admitted
for her that she, who in the bloom of youth
had never known how to display the faintest symptoms
of coquetry, now sometimes enjoyed tokens
of disturbance unwillingly exhibited by Harlan when
the rival appeared to win an advantage. McMillan,
dark and growing a little bald, counterbalanced what
was lacking above by a decoration below already rare
in the land, but not yet a curiosity, a Van Dyke
beard, well suited to his face. In manner, too, he
was equal to the flavour of a fine old portrait, and
he had spoken from his childhood in the accent
Harlan had carefully acquired. Thus the latter
was sometimes but too well encountered on his own
ground.</p>

<p class="pindent">He met one of these defeats in an early April
twilight when he had expected to find Martha alone,
as he knew a meeting of the board of directors of the
“Ornaby Four” had been called for that evening,
and George McMillan was a member of the board.
The air was warm with one of the misplacements
of this season, when sometimes a midsummer day
wanders from its proper moorings and irrationally
ascends almost to the chilly headwaters of spring.
Martha was upon the veranda, occupied with a fan
and the conversation of Mr. McMillan when Harlan
arrived; and the newcomer was so maladroit as to
make his disappointed expectations plain.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I thought you had a directors’ meeting,” he said,
almost with his greeting and before he had seated
himself in one of the wicker chairs brought out
upon the veranda by the unseasonable warmth. “I
thought there was——”</p>

<p class="pindent">George assented placidly. “There was, but it
couldn’t be held. Our president had to go to another
one that he’s president of—the Broadwood
Interurban. It’s in difficulties, I’m afraid, because
of too high wages and too much competition by
motorcycles and small cars. I hope Dan can straighten
it out.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I hope so,” Harlan said. “That is, strictly as
his brother I hope so. As a human being still trying
to exist in what was once a comfortable house, I
might take another attitude. I live deep in the
downtown district now, for my worst sins, and those
long Broadwood cars screech every hour, night and
day, on a curve not a hundred yards from my library.”
He sighed. “But why should I waste my
breath, still complaining? It all grows steadily
worse and worse, year after year, and if one happens
to like living in a city in his own native land, there’s
nowhere to escape to. I suppose National Avenue—poor
thing, look at the wreck of it!—I say I suppose
it couldn’t have hoped to escape the fate of Fifth
Avenue; for the same miserable ruction is going on
all over the country. My illustrious brother and
his kind have ruined everything that was peaceful
and everything that was clean—they began by murdering
the English language, and now they’ve murdered
all whiteness. Beauty is dead.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Isn’t that only a question of your definition?”
McMillan inquired.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why is it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“For one reason, because everything’s a question
of definitions.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, it isn’t,” Harlan returned somewhat brusquely;
and Martha sat in silence, amused to perceive
that her two callers had straightway resumed a tilting
not infrequent when they met. A lady’s part was only
to preside at the joust. “There’s only one definition
of beauty,” Harlan added to his contradiction.</p>

<p class="pindent">“What is it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“The one Athens believed in.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It won’t do for that brother of yours,” his antagonist
returned. “The Greeks are dead, and you
can’t tie Dan and his sort down to a dead definition.
The growth isn’t beautiful to you, but it is to them,
or else they wouldn’t make it. Of course you’re sure
you’re right about your own definition, but they’re
so busy making what <span class="it">they</span>’re sure is beautiful they
don’t even know that anybody disagrees with them.
It won’t do you the slightest good to disagree with
them, either.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why not?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Because they’ve got everything in their hands,”
George McMillan replied cheerfully;—“and they’re
too busy to listen to any one who isn’t making something
besides criticisms.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“And for that reason,” Harlan began, “all of us
who care for what’s quiet and cool and charming in
life are to hold our peace and let——”</p>

<p class="pindent">He was interrupted, unable to make himself heard
because of a shattering uproar that came from beyond
the iron fence to the south. A long and narrow
motor car, enamelled Chinese red, stood in the
Oliphants’ driveway, and an undersized boy of sixteen
had just run out of the house and jumped into
the driver’s seat. Dusk had not fallen darkly; he
saw the group upon the neighbouring veranda well
enough, but either thought it too much effort to
salute Martha and his uncles, or was preoccupied with
the starting of his car;—he gave no sign of being
aware of them. Evidently the unmuffled machine-gun
firing of his exhaust was delightful to his young
ears, for he increased its violence to the utmost, although
the noise was unlawful, and continued it as
he shot the car down the drive, out of the gates and
down the street at a speed also unlawful.</p>

<p class="pindent">“There, at least,” Harlan said, “is something of
which criticism might possibly be listened to with
good effect—even by my busy brother.”</p>

<p class="pindent">But George laughed and shook his head. “No.
That’s the very last thing he’d allow you to criticize.
He’d only tell you that Henry is ‘the finest young
man God ever made!’ In fact, that’s what he told
me yesterday evening when I dined there; and I
had more than a suspicion I’d caught a whiff of
something suggesting a cocktail from our mutual
nephew, as he came in for a hurried dinner between
speedings. But that isn’t Dan’s fault.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, it is,” Harlan said. “Giving a sixteen-year-old
boy a car like that!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, the fault is my sister’s. What’s a boy to do
when his mother keeps him hanging around Paris so
long in the autumn that it’s too late for him to make
up his class-work, and he has only a tutor to cajole?
I don’t blame Henry much. In fact, the older I grow
the less I blame anything.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No?” Harlan said. “I’m afraid the world
won’t get anywhere very fast unless there are some
people to point out its mistakes.”</p>

<p class="pindent">But the other bachelor jouster was not at all disconcerted
by this reproof, nor by the tone of it,
which was incautiously superior. “By George,
Oliphant, I always <span class="it">have</span> believed you were really a true
Westerner under that surface of yours! The way you
said ‘the world won’t get anywhere very fast’ was
precisely in the right tone. You’re reverting to
type, and if the reversion doesn’t stop I shan’t be surprised
to hear of your breathing deep of the smoke
and calling it ‘Prosperity’ with the best of them!”</p>

<p class="pindent">Harlan was displeased. “I suppose the smoke
comes under your definition of beauty, too, doesn’t
it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It isn’t my definition,” George explained. “I
was groping for Dan’s. Yes, I think the smoke’s
beautiful to him because he believes it means growth
and power, and he thinks they’re beautiful.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I dare say. Would you consider it a rational
view for any even half-educated man to hold—that
soft-coal smoke is beautiful? Do you think so,
Martha, when it makes pneumonia epidemic, ruins
everything white that you have in your house and
everything white that you wear? Do you?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It’s pretty trying,” she answered, as a conscientious
housewife, but added hopefully: “We’ll
get rid of it some day, though. So many people are
complaining of it I’m sure they’ll do something about
it before long.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Harlan laughed dryly, for he had hoped she would
say that. “I’ve been re-reading John Evelyn’s
diary,” he said. “Evelyn declared the London
smoke was getting so dreadful that a stop would have
to be put to it somehow. The king told him to devise
a plan for getting rid of it, and Evelyn set about it
quite hopefully. That was in the latter part of the
seventeenth century. Evelyn is dead, but the
smoke’s still there.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“And yet,” George McMillan said coolly, “I’m
told they’ve made quite a place of London, in spite
of that!”</p>

<p class="pindent">Martha laughed aloud, and Harlan was so unfortunate
as to be annoyed. “It seems rather a
childish argument in view of the fact that we sit here
in the atmosphere of what might well be a freight
yard,” he said; and, turning to Martha he spoke in a
lowered voice, audible to his opponent, yet carrying
the implication that McMillan was excluded
from the conference. “My committee have at last
got the symphony organization completed,” he said.
“The orchestra knows it can depend on a reliable
support now, and the first concert will be two weeks
from to-night. I hope you won’t mind going with
me.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No; I won’t mind,” she said, and hospitably explained
to McMillan: “We’ve been trying for years
to expand our week of the ‘April Festival’ into something
more permanent. Mr. Oliphant has done most
of the work, and it’s really a public service. It will be
good news for your sister;—I understand she’s always
felt we were a lost people, in music particularly.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“We’ll have a start at any rate,” Harlan said, as
he rose to go. “That is, if the smoke doesn’t throttle
our singers. Venable is back from South America
and there ought to be some interest to hear him.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Venable?” George repeated. “Did you say
Venable?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes; the baritone. He’s still just in his prime;
at least so his agent says. Have you ever heard
him?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Long ago,” the other returned. “I——” He
stopped abruptly.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Did you know him?” Martha asked.</p>

<p class="pindent">“No. That is, I had a short interview with him
once, but—no, I shouldn’t say I know him.” He
rose, in courtesy to the departing Harlan, and extended
his hand. “You mustn’t wait behind the
next corner and leap out on me with a bowie-knife,
Oliphant,” he said. “I didn’t mean to be such a
disagreeable arguer.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Not at all,” Harlan returned, somewhat coldly,
though he added an effect of geniality to his departure
by a murmur of laughter, and got away without any
further emphasis upon his disappointment at finding
his rival in possession. The latter gentleman, however,
made little use of the field left open to him.
Not long after Harlan had gone Martha noticed that
her remaining guest seemed to be rather absent-minded,
and she rallied him upon it.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’m afraid you thrive upon conflict, Mr. McMillan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Peace doesn’t seem to stimulate you—or else <span class="it">I</span>
don’t! You’ve hardly spoken since Mr. Oliphant
left. I’m afraid you’re——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You’re afraid I’m what?” he said, as she paused;
and although the dusk had fallen now, it was not
too dark for her to see that his preoccupation was
serious.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Are you troubled about anything?” she asked.</p>

<p class="pindent">“No. Why?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I thought you looked——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, no,” he said. “It’s nothing. Perhaps I
am a little bothered,” he admitted. “But it’s only
about business.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Not about the ‘Ornaby Four?’ ” she said, surprised.
“I thought it was established as a tremendous
success.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, it is,” he assured her promptly. “It is.
It’s an extraordinary little car and nothing can stop
it—except temporarily. It’s bound to climb over
any little temporary difficulties. We may have
made mistakes, but they won’t amount to anything
in the long run.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You say you <span class="it">have</span> made mistakes?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Not until this year, and even then nothing we
can’t remedy. You see Dan’s a great fellow for believing
in almost anything that’s new, and an inventor
came along last summer with a new type of
friction clutch; and we put it in our car. Then I’m
afraid we built a fairly enormous number of ‘Fours’
during the winter, but you see we were justified in
that, because we knew there’d be a demand for
them.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“And there wasn’t?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, yes; there was. But——” he paused; then
went on: “Well, the people haven’t seemed to like
the new clutch, and that gives us rather a black eye
for the time being. Of course we’re going to do our
best to straighten things out; we’ll put our old clutch
back on all the new cars, but——”</p>

<p class="pindent">He paused uncomfortably again, and she inquired:
“But won’t that make everything all right again?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, yes—after a time. The trouble is, I’m
afraid it’s stopped our sales rather flat—for the time
being, that is. You see, there’s a lot of money we
expected would be pouring in on us about now—and
it doesn’t pour. I’m not really worried, but I’m a
little afraid Dan might need it, because his inter-urban
ventures appear to have been—well, rather
hazardous. You told me once that his brother’s
description of him was ‘dancing on the tight-rope’
and in a way that’s not so far wrong. Of course
he’ll pull through.” George suddenly struck the
stone railing beside him a light blow with his open
hand, and jumped up. “Good gracious! What am
I doing but talking business to a lady on a spring
evening? I knew I was in my dotage!” And he
went to the steps.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Wait,” Martha said hurriedly. “You don’t
really think——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“That Dan Oliphant’s affairs are in any real
danger? No; of course not;—I don’t know what
made me run on like that. Men go through these
little disturbances every day; it’s a part of the game
they play, and they don’t think anything about it.
You can be sure <span class="it">he</span> isn’t worrying. Did you ever
know him to let such things stop him? He’s been
through a thousand of ’em and walked over ’em.
He’s absolutely all right.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You’re sure?” she said, as he went down the
steps.</p>

<p class="pindent">“He’s absolutely all right, and I’d take my oath
to it,” George said; but he added: “That is, he is
if the banks don’t call him.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“If the banks don’t what?”</p>

<p class="pindent">He laughed reassuringly. “If the banks don’t do
something they have no reason to do and certainly
won’t do. Good-night. I’m going to stop in next
door and see my sister a little while before she goes
to bed.”</p>

<p class="pindent">His figure grew dimmer as he went toward the
gate, and Martha, staring after him, began to be
haunted by that mysterious phrase of his, “if the
banks don’t call him.”</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XXVII</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="dropcap">T</span>HE next day, at lunch, she asked her father
what it meant, though she did not mention
Dan; and she brought out a crackling
chuckle from that old bit of hickory, now brittle and
almost sapless, but still serviceable.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Means a bank wants its money back; that’s
all,” he said. “There’s plenty of reasons why a
bank wants money—same as anybody else.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But suppose I’d borrowed of a bank and was a
good customer, and the bank knew I had plenty of
property to cover the loan, would the First National,
for instance, ever worry me to pay it, if they knew
I only needed a little time to get all I owed it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Not unless we thought you mightn’t be as able
to pay us as well later on as when we ask for it,” the
old man answered. “You’d be all right as long as
the First stood by you. The First’ll protect a customer
long as anybody; and the others all follow our
lead. What in time’s the matter with you? You
plannin’ to borrow money? Geemunently! I should
think you’d be able to put up with what you get
out o’ me!”</p>

<p class="pindent">His voice cracked into falsetto, as it often did nowadays;
but the vehemence that cracked it was not intended
to be serious; he was in a jocular mood; and
the conversation reassured her, for he was one of
the directors of the “First”; and if Dan were really
in difficulties and the bank meant to increase them,
she thought her father would have seized upon the
occasion to speak of it triumphantly. Indeed, he
had once angrily instructed her to wait for such an
occasion. “You just wait till the time comes!”
he had said. “You sit there crowin’ over me because
I used to prophesy Dan Oliphant was never goin’ to
amount to anything, and you claim all this noise
and gas proves he <span class="it">has</span>! You just wait till the day
comes when I get the chance to crow over <span class="it">you</span>, miss!
You’ll hear me!”</p>

<p class="pindent">She was convinced that he wouldn’t have missed
the chance to crow. Nevertheless a little of her
uneasiness remained, and was still with her, two
weeks later, when she went with Harlan to the concert
of the new symphony orchestra, on an evening
so drenched with rain that she inquired with some
anxiety if his car was amphibious.</p>

<p class="pindent">“If it can’t swim I’m afraid we won’t get there,”
she said, as they set off upon the splashing avenue.
“Judging by the windows, we aren’t in an automobile,
but in one of those tanks that take pictures
of ocean life for the movies. I’m not sure it’s a tank
though; the old avenue has turned into a river, and
perhaps we’re in a side-wheel steamboat. I’m afraid
this’ll be bad for your attendance. You’ll have a
big deficit to make up in reward for your struggle to
make us an artistic people.”</p>

<p class="pindent">There was to be no deficit, however, she discovered,
as they went to their seats in the theatre
Harlan’s committee had taken for the concert;—interest
in the new organization and in the coming
of the renowned Venable had been stronger than
the fear of a wetting. The place was being rapidly
filled, and, glancing about her, Martha saw “almost
everybody and a great many others,” she said.</p>

<p class="pindent">Not far away from where she and Harlan sat, Lena
was in a box with George McMillan. The other
seats in the box were vacant; and Lena, sitting close
to the velvet rail, and wearing as a contrast to her
own whiteness a Parisian interpretation of Spanish
passion, in black jet and jet-black, was the most conspicuous
figure in the theatre. She leaned back in
her chair, her brilliant eyes upon the stage, though
there was nothing there except a piano and a small
forest of music stands; and Martha thought she
looked excited—music was evidently a lively stimulant
for her. Her brother, not quite so much within
the public view, and possibly wishing his sister were
less vividly offered to that view, appeared to the
observing Martha as somewhat depressed and nervous.
There was no conversation between the
brother and sister, though he glanced at Lena from
time to time, from the side of his eye.</p>

<p class="pindent">Martha wondered where Dan was. He would
prefer a concert by Sousa’s Band to the French and
Russian programme set for this evening, she knew;
but the opening of “the Symphony” was in its
way a civic occasion; one for which the credit was in
some part due to his brother; and she had expected
him to be there. “Isn’t Dan coming?” she asked
Harlan.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I think so.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Do you think he’s worried about business lately,
Harlan?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, I don’t think he ever worries about anything.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, but you’re wrong!” she said quickly. “You
don’t know him; a man can’t sacrifice everything to
just one object in life, as he has, all these years, and
not worry about it. I know your mother worries
about <span class="it">him</span>. She says he never takes any care of
himself, and it’s beginning to tell on him. But I
mean are there any—any rumours around town that
he’s in some sort of business difficulty, or anything
like that?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No; I think not. At least I haven’t heard of
anything like that being more prevalent with him
than usual. He’s always up and down, either up to
his neck or riding on the crest—that’s his way, and
I don’t believe he’d enjoy himself otherwise. The
only thing he could talk about when I saw him yesterday
at home was his new house. It’s finished at
last; and they’re going to move into it. Mother’s
sold our old place, you know, and the wrecking will
begin next week. Pleasant for you!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, I’m trying to get father to go, too,” she
said. “He’s terribly obstinate, but with the house
on the other side of us rebuilt into an apartment,
and now your mother’s to be torn down, he’ll have
to give in. We’ll have to move out to northern
Ornaby like everybody else. You’ll have to come,
too, Harlan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Thank you,” he said. “I’ve been waiting a
good many years for that invitation. May I make
an appointment with your father for to-morrow
morning?”</p>

<p class="pindent">She laughed, blushed, and touched his coat sleeve
with her folded fan of black feathers. “Hush!
People will hear you!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You fear it may be suspected that I’m still serious
in my intentions?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Hush!” she said again. “I mean we’re about to
hear some serious music, and it’s no time for nonsense.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Harlan was obedient; he said no more, but brightened
as he listened to the serious music;—her tone had
been kind and he hoped that he was not mistaken
in thinking he detected something a little self-conscious
in it. He was no eager lover now; his bachelorhood
was pleasant to him; and he could be content
with it; but as Martha leaned forward to listen he
looked sidelong at her and felt that he had been right
and wise to wish for no other woman. They had
been companions for so long, and understood each
other so well, marriage would be no disturbing change
for either of them. He was assured of happiness
in it, if he could persuade her, and something in
the way she had just spoken to him made him
almost sure that he was about to persuade her at
last.</p>

<p class="pindent">After the first suite by the orchestra the great
Venable appeared, making his way among the seated
musicians and coming forward with an air of affability
operatic in its sweeping expressiveness—a
pale, handsome, black-haired man of grand dimensions.
He needed no costume other than his black
clothes and shapely ampleness of white front to make
him seem, not an actual man, but a figure from romantic
drama, a dweller in enchanted palaces and
the master of heroic passions.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’ve always wanted to see one of those splendid,
big, statuesque opera or concert people at home,”
Martha whispered to her escort. “I’ve never been
near them except when they moved on the grand
scale, like this. It would be an experience to see a
man like that eat an egg—I can’t imagine it at all.
Do you suppose he could?”</p>

<p class="pindent">A moment later, when he began to sing, she was
sure he couldn’t; and as the magnificent instrument
in his throat continued in operation, he carried her
to such thrilling grandeurs of feeling that she could
not even imagine herself eating an egg, or eating
anything, or ever again doing anything commonplace—for
while he sang she, too, dwelt in enchanted
palaces, moved on the grand scale, and knew only
heroic emotions.</p>

<p class="pindent">But when he had finished the encore he was generous
enough to add to this part of his programme,
and had left the stage, she underwent a reaction not
unusual after such stimulations. “It’s a great voice
and he’s a great artist, if I’m equal to knowing
either,” she said. “But there’s something about
that man—I don’t know what, except it all seems
to end in being about himself. It’s so personal,
somehow. I’m positive he made every woman in
the whole audience wish that he were singing just
for her alone. I don’t think music ought to be like
that, unless perhaps sometimes when it’s a love-song,
and those things he sang weren’t supposed to——”
She broke off suddenly, as her glance wandered.
“There’s Dan. He got here, after all.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan was coming down the outer aisle to the box
where Lena sat; and with him was the younger Sam
Kohn, the two having just entered the theatre after
the business conference that had detained them.
Sam was talking hurriedly and earnestly in husky
whispers, which he emphasized with many quick
gestures; but he left his tall companion at the curtains
of the latter’s box.</p>

<p class="pindent">“See you right after the show,” he said, and then
went slowly to the series of boxes occupied by his
father and brother and their families, while Dan,
who looked sallow and tired, Martha thought, stared
after him for a moment, then moved forward and
seated himself beside George McMillan. Lena gave
her husband the greeting of a slightly lifted eyebrow,
shown to him in profile; but McMillan leaned toward
him and whispered an anxious question.</p>

<p class="pindent">“It’s all right,” Dan said. “Sam Kohn’s got his
father’s promise to hold out against ’em. They
want every inch of Ornaby I’ve got left—that’s
what they’ve really been after a long time. I’d like
to see anybody get Ornaby away from me! They
want the Four, too, and they think they’ve got both;
but they won’t get either. The Kohns’ll play it
through on my——”</p>

<p class="pindent">But Lena stopped this inappropriate talk of mere
business. She made a slight gesture with her lovely
little bare arm, her fingers flashing impatient sparks;
and Dan was silent. He remained so throughout the
rest of the concert, listening with an expression not
unamiable, though at times his big face, lately grown
flaccid and heavier, fell into the shapings that indicate
drowsiness; and once or twice his glance was vaguely
troubled, happening to rest upon the white contours
of his wife’s shoulders;—her glittering black scarf
had fallen as she leaned forward when the godlike
baritone came out again.</p>

<p class="pindent">“That fellow looks kind of soft-soapy, but he’s got
a crackin’ good voice,” was Dan’s placid comment,
at the conclusion of the last encore of the final number.
Venable was withdrawing from the stage, and
most of the audience were getting on their wraps; but
an admiring and avaricious gallery demanded more
of the charmer, and clapped on. He stopped, shook
his head, smilingly; then made his last bow profoundly
and obliquely, with a shift of his large eyes in
the same direction. “Not bowin’ to <span class="it">us</span>, is he?” Dan
inquired, surprised. “I don’t know him.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I do,” Lena said, “I told you the other day I
used to know him. I’m going around to speak to
him.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I can’t wait, I’m afraid. Sam Kohn’s lookin’
for me in the lobby now, and he and I got to have a
talk with his father. You take the car, Lena—I’ll
leave it in front for you, and I’ll get Sam to drive me
home from old man Kohn’s. I’ll have to hurry.”</p>

<p class="pindent">McMillan was looking at his sister darkly and
steadily. “I’ll see to Lena,” he said. “I’ll go with
her wherever she wants to go, and then I’ll take her
home.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Lena laughed airily. “Why, no; it isn’t necessary.
You’d better go with Dan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No; I believe I’d better go with you, Lena.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Can’t wait for you to settle it,” Dan said. “It’s
pretty important I don’t miss Sam. I may be out
fairly late, Lena. Good-night.” And, leaving the
brother and sister confronting each other, before they
moved toward the stage door behind the boxes, he
hurried out to the lobby, where Sam Kohn seized
his arm.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’ll take you over to papa’s in my car, Dan,” he
said. “I been talkin’ some more to the old man
durin’ the show. He’ll stick, all right, as a favour to
me, because I put it to him pretty stiff that you’re
my old friend, and what you’ve done for this town
has made money for Kohn &amp; Sons, and’s bound to
make more in the future, besides; and I told him anyhow,
by golly, he just had to! Well, he says he’ll
stick, and he’ll do it, Dan; but he ain’t none too sure
he can carry them old shellbacks with him. He
ain’t never been any pessimist about anything, Dan,
but he thinks they see a chance to clean up if they
call you. He’s afraid he can’t stop ’em from doin’
it, Dan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan frowned angrily. “Well—let ’em call! They
can’t break me! I’ll <span class="it">make</span> it, all right, Sam—I’ve
been through these things before.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Sam’s voice had shown some emotion, but now it
became tremulous with sympathy and with anger.
“That bunch of old shellbacks, they haven’t got
sense enough to see what a man like you means to
their own business in the long run. They haven’t got
any what you call vision, as it were. They belong
to the old generation, the bunch of old back numbers!
Honest, they make me sick as a cat, Dan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">He was still thus abusing the shellbacks when he
and his friend passed out of the theatre, and were almost
swept from their feet by squalls of chilling rain
before they could get into his car. He did all the
talking, an unusual thing for Dan to allow a companion
to do. Always before, when misfortune had
threatened, he had been jauntily voluble.</p>

<p class="pindent">He did not come home until one o’clock, but there
was a light in the library, and, going in, he found his
mother reading “In Memoriam.” She had begun
to stoop after her husband’s death, and her hair had
lost its last touch of gray; it was all white now, so
that even to the glamouring eyes of her son she had
come to be a little, fragile old lady; but her good will
to all the world still looked forth through the thick
glass of her spectacles.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, mother! You oughtn’t to be up this late!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I just got to reading——” she explained. “I like
to read on a rainy night. Did you lock the front
door?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes. Isn’t Lena in?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes. Mr. McMillan brought her home an hour
ago. Yes; <span class="it">she’s</span> in.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan laughed, noting her emphasis. “ ‘<span class="it">She</span> is?’ ”
he repeated. “Well, then we’re <span class="it">all</span> in. Who else is
left to come in?” He went to her and patted her
shoulder. “I believe you were sitting up for me.
Don’t you know better?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I might be anxious about you, such a bad night,
Dan,” she said. “I don’t like to pester you, but
you ought to take some regular exercise. You never
<span class="it">have</span> taken any; and you eat your meals just anytime
you happen to get a minute or two. I do think
you’ve been looking pretty run-down lately; but I
wasn’t sitting up for you—not exactly, that is. I
mean I was really sitting up for somebody else.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Who?”</p>

<p class="pindent">She smiled apologetically. “Of course I know
young people are different nowadays, and it isn’t a
grandmother’s place to interfere; but I am afraid it
was a mistake, your getting Henry that car.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You don’t mean to tell me he’s not in the house?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’m afraid so. After the rest of you had gone
he said he believed he’d go for a drive in his car. I
said he mustn’t think of it on such a night, but he
laughed, and I couldn’t get him to pay any attention.
I was hoping to hear him come in before you did.
Perhaps you’d better——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes,” Dan said, as he strode into the hall. “I
think I had.”</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XXVIII</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="dropcap">H</span>E FOUND Henry, but the search took
two hours, and his clothes were sodden
with the rain that drenched them as he
got in and out of his car to make inquiries, or to
investigate restaurants of lively all-night reputations.
The red “speedster” he had bought for his son stood
hub-deep in the running gutter before the last of
these to be reached; and when the father brought
his boy out of the place, and helped him into the
Morgan limousine, Henry protested in a whimper
somewhat incoherent that he wanted to drive his own
car home;—he didn’t like to leave it out all night
in the rain he said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I guess it <span class="it">has</span> stood where it is about long
enough!” Dan told him grimly. “But we’ll leave
it there till I send a man for it in the morning—to
sell it, Henry.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Henry whimpered again; then recovered enough
presence of mind to say no more. When they
reached home, he went upstairs as quickly as he
could, although once he had to employ the assistance
of the banister railing; and his father followed him.</p>

<p class="pindent">A light still shone into the hall from the library
door, and Dan, whose face was pallid and startled,
made his voice cheerful as he called from the stairway:
“It’s all right, mother. The boy’s home and
everything’s all right. Just a little foolishness with
his car; and I’ve decided it’ll be offered for sale to-morrow.
You go to bed now.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Henry went to his room and Dan was following
him, when Lena, wearing a bright kimono over her
nightdress, made her appearance in the open doorway
of her bedroom. “What <span class="it">is</span> all this?” she asked
petulantly.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Never mind!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But I do mind! What are you saying about
selling Henry’s car? Didn’t I hear you say——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, you did.” Dan closed the door of Henry’s
room and came to her. “I made a terrible mistake
to give it to him. We’ve both made a mistake the
way we’ve raised him. He’s a good boy; he’s got
a fine nature and a noble soul. But he’s got with
bad companions. He’s been——” He paused, and
went on slowly, with difficulty: “He’s been—he’s
been drinkin’, Lena.”</p>

<p class="pindent">She said nothing, but stared at him blankly for a
moment—then the stare became an angry one.</p>

<p class="pindent">“We’ve got to change our whole way of treatin’
Henry,” her unhappy husband told her. “We’ve
been all wrong. He—he got with bad companions——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes,” she interrupted angrily. “I should think
he might, in a town like this!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“My Lord! It ain’t the <span class="it">town’s</span> fault. For heaven’s
sake, don’t go back to that old story at a time
like this!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, I will,” she said. “The time’s come when
you’ve got to let me take Henry and go where I
want to.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan looked dazed. “Go where you want to?
Why, where do you want to go?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Anywhere I please!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But, my Lord! You were away seven months
out of last year. You only got back from Europe
last October! What do you——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I want to go and I want to take Henry with me!
What’s just happened proves that I’m right. This
is the wrong place for him.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But I tell you the place hasn’t got anything on
earth to do with it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Hasn’t it?” she cried. “I tell you it has all to do
with it, just as it’s had all to do with me ever since
I came here! I’ve hated it every instant of all these
silly, wasted years I’ve been pent up here. And
now it’s ruining my child—yes, ruining him—and
you want me still to stay here and let <span class="it">him</span> stay here!
You want me to waste the rest of my life, and ruin
my <span class="it">child’s</span> life, but I tell you, Dan Oliphant, you
can’t make us <span class="it">do</span> it—not either of us! Not <span class="it">either</span>
of us, do you hear?” She had become hysterical,
and her voice was so wild and loud that Mrs. Oliphant
had come into the hall, downstairs, and was calling
up piteously to know what was the matter.</p>

<p class="pindent">“What <span class="it">is</span> the matter, Dan, dear?” she called.
“What <span class="it">is</span> the matter with Lena?”</p>

<p class="pindent">But Lena, shrieking, “You can’t <span class="it">make</span> us—you
can’t <span class="it">make</span> us!” ran into her room and locked the
door. It was a thick old door, but she could still be
heard, and it was not difficult to understand that
she had thrown herself upon her bed, and was there
convulsive, still shrieking: “You can’t <span class="it">make</span> us!
You can’t <span class="it">make</span> us! You can’t, you can’t, you
<span class="it">can’t</span>——”</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XXIX</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="dropcap">D</span>AN reassured his mother as well as he could.
“Only a fit of nerves;—too much music, I
guess,” he said; and, returning to his son’s
door, found it locked and Henry as unresponsive as
the door. The father knocked repeatedly but not
loudly, demanding admittance and obtaining the
response of a profound silence. Then, as he heard
Mrs. Oliphant slowly ascending the stairs to her
belated bed, he decided to keep out of her way until
he had better composed himself, and, retiring to his
own room, discovered that his teeth were chattering.</p>

<p class="pindent">He removed his cold and sodden garments; but
his bed seemed as cold as his clothes; so he got up,
put a dressing-gown over his pajamas, and again
tried to sleep. The bed still seemed cold—so cold
that his teeth still showed the disposition to chatter.
However, he told himself that he had “more to
worry about than a little chill”; and, between the
chill and his more important worries, slept but fitfully.
He was warm when the drizzly morning came—too
warm—and, again communing with himself
on the subject of his physical annoyances, philosophically
dismissed the fever as unworthy of his attention.
“A little temperature’s perfectly natural after
a chill,” he thought. “It’ll pass off, and I’ve got
other things to think about <span class="it">this</span> day!”</p>

<p class="pindent">So, descending early to the dining-room he had a
cup of strong coffee, and left the house without having
seen anybody except the cook and his chauffeur.
The interview with his son was postponed until
evening;—Dan felt he would be better fitted to speak
with authority after he had beaten the shellbacks
and had shown the First National, with the help of
the Kohns and some others, that it wouldn’t do to
“call” him.</p>

<p class="pindent">He had a hard day of it; the shells of the shellbacks
were tough and seasoned casings, tough as old hickory,
and about as penetrable to mere argument.
The morning began ominously, and the afternoon
came to a close, in the office of Sam Kohn, Junior,
in something not far from complete disaster; though
Sam insisted, when he and Dan were finally left
alone together there, that it was not complete.</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, sir!” he said. “The way you got a perfect
right to look at it, it ain’t near as bad as it might
been. Maybe from one angle you can say you
come out the little end of the horn, but from another
angle, you certainly did come <span class="it">out</span>, you might say.
You got to look at it from this angle, Dan: you
<span class="it">might</span> been sittin’ there stone cold broke right now.
I tell you last night late, when I talked it over with
the old man after you’d gone, I was mighty scared
it was goin’ to be bankruptcy—but it’s a lot better
than that. <span class="it">Ain’t</span> it better’n that, Dan?”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan looked up without altering the despondent
attitude into which he had fallen, as he sat in one
of his friend’s mahogany office chairs. “Yes; I
guess it could have been a good deal worse. The
only trouble is——” He took a deep and laboured
breath, then laughed plaintively. “The only trouble
is, while it might have been worse, I wasn’t hardly
prepared for its bein’ so bad!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But it ain’t so <span class="it">blame</span> bad, Dan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No; I thought when I showed ’em what I had to
fall back on they’d see they couldn’t afford to call.
I thought I could show ’em it would be so profitable
to tide me over and let me renew that they’d see it
was the best policy. They <span class="it">ought</span> to have seen it, too!”</p>

<p class="pindent">Agreeing with this, Sam swore heartily, then he
added, “Them old hardshells! The worst about
’em is they got their business training when everything
was on the small scale, and they don’t know
what a liberal policy means. You take that old
Shelby, for instance, he was raised on such a stingy
scale he thinks everybody’s a gambler that borrows
a nickel on a million-dollar bond! He’s got one foot
in the grave and he’s so shrunk it takes two people
to see him, but, by golly, he wants to get his hands on
everything! They’re a tough bunch, Dan, and I’m
glad you got away from ’em alive. Because you
still <span class="it">are</span> alive. Anyhow you’re <span class="it">that</span> much!”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan shook his head. “Just barely, I guess. If it
had been that Broadwood hard luck by itself, I’d have
pulled out o’ the hole. If that hadn’t come just at
the same time our sales smashed with the Four——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“That’s exactly the way bad things do come,
though,” Sam interrupted, and went on to expound
the philosophy of misfortune. “They come together,
because that’s what makes ’em bad. It’s the comin’
together of bad things that makes all the trouble
there is. If they’d come one at a time a person
wouldn’t mind ’em so much. The angle I look at it,
if a person goes along all right for a good while it’s
only because a whole lot of bad things are holdin’
off on him. That makes ’em bound to come together
when they do come. It never rains but it pours,
Dan, as it were. That’s why, when such things
happen, we got to put up the best umbrella a feller
can lay his hands on.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan did not seem to have heard him. “I <span class="it">could</span>
stand havin’ to sign over the Four to ’em, Sam,” he
said. “I’d like to have kept it in my hands, but I
could <span class="it">stand</span> havin’ ’em take it. But when I think
I had to sit here and sign over <span class="it">Ornaby</span>——” Suddenly
he uttered a broken sound, like a groan; and
his whole face became corrugated with a distortion
that took more than a moment to conquer. “Why,
I’ve just given my life’s blood to Ornaby, and
now——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Now?” Sam said testily. “Well, what’s the
matter with now? Didn’t we force ’em to agree
to turn you over some stock in it when they get the
organization made? You ain’t out of Ornaby, are
you? Not entirely, by no means!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It’s not mine,” Dan said. “It’s not mine any
longer. Nothin’s mine any longer!”</p>

<p class="pindent">His friend affected an angry impatience. “Don’t
sit there and talk like that to a person that knows
something! If you’d had to make the kind of assignment
you <span class="it">might</span> had to, you’d be where it would
be pretty hard for you to come back. Ain’t you
goin’ to try to come back?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Don’t you worry about that,” Dan said. “I’m
just as sure to come back as I am to go out of that
door!” He laughed rather shakily, as he rose to
go. “Why, a few years from now—less’n that!—why,
by this time next <span class="it">year</span> if I don’t get Ornaby
back I’ll make a new Ornaby—I’ll find it somewhere,
and this town won’t take long to grow out to it, the
way it’s started now. Don’t you ever worry about
my comin’ back!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“That’s the ticket!” his friend cried. “That’s
the way you used to talk. You go home and get a
good rest—you certainly been through a rough day,
and you look like it!—and then you get up to-morrow
morning and start to come back!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“That’s the programme I’ve mapped out, Sammy.
I guess you’re right about my gettin’ on home, too.
I don’t feel just the freshest in the world.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Wait a minute,” the other said. “I want to
make certain about one thing. You told me I
mustn’t go near your brother, and my tacklin’ him
the way I did this morning behind your back—well,
I never liked the cold-blooded silk-stocking upstart,
but he <span class="it">did</span> show he’s a gentleman. I been
afraid——” He hesitated, somewhat confused.
“Well, I know how it is in families, when one of a
family don’t want help from another of the same
family, the last person on earth, and I been kind of
afraid you might hold it some against me, my tacklin’
him behind your back like that, after you told
me not to.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Bless you, no!” Dan said heartily. “You
haven’t done me anything except kindness.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, and I’ve had many’s the favour from you,
both business and outside, Dan. That’s why I
persuaded the old man the city needs a man like
you. You got many’s the long year of good in you
yet, Dan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I hope so; I hope so,” Dan said, and held out his
hand. “Good-night, and thank you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">But Sam almost jumped as he took the extended
hand. “My goodness, man, you ought to be home
in bed! You had too much excitement and you got
a high fever. If I had a temperature like that, I
wouldn’t be here in my office; I’d be talkin’ to my
doctor.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, it’ll pass off,” Dan returned cheerfully.
“It’s only one of those up-and-down things—chilly
a little while and too hot the next little while. Good-night,
old man.” And with that, he thanked this
boyhood friend again, and descended to the busy
street.</p>

<p class="pindent">After a cloudy day the sky had cleared; a fair
sunset was perceptible as a gloomy fire in the heart
of the western smoke; and Dan, having long since
dismissed his chauffeur, decided to walk home,
instead of taking either a trolley car or a taxicab.
Before he had gone far, however, he regretted this
decision, for his feet had assumed a peculiar independence,
and seemed to be unfamiliar parts of him:
it was only by concentrating his will upon them that
he forced them to continue to be his carriers.
“Strange!” he thought. “A man’s own feet behavin’
like that!”</p>

<p class="pindent">Then he laughed to himself, not grimly, yet somewhat
ruefully. Everything he had believed his own
seemed to be behaving like that. Ornaby Addition
had been as much a part of him as his feet were, but
he was making his feet behave; and when he could
get his breath, and start in again, he would make
Ornaby behave once more. The shellbacks might
get Ornaby away from him for a while, but they
couldn’t keep it!</p>

<p class="pindent">When he reached the tall cast-iron Oliphant gateposts,
white no longer, but oyster-coloured with the
city grime, there was a taxicab waiting in the street
before them; and by this time he was so lifelessly
tired he wished the cab might carry him into the
house, but exerting his will, made his erratic feet serve
him that far. He found his brother-in-law in the
library with Mrs. Oliphant, who was crying quietly.</p>

<p class="pindent">George jumped up as Dan came into the room.
“Dan, I’m glad you’ve come before I have to go.
I’ve got to catch the six-fifteen for New York——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No,” Dan said, and he sat heavily in one of the
comfortable old easy-chairs. “No. I don’t believe
you better leave town just now. They’ve thrown
me out of control, but I got ’em to promise they’ll
keep you on, George. If there’s somebody there
that’s in my interest, maybe when I get on my feet
again——” He turned to his mother, looking at her
perplexedly: “For heaven’s sake, don’t cry, mother!
I’m sorry you’ve heard about it, but don’t you fret:
I’ll get back—after I’ve had a few days’ rest, maybe I
will. I don’t believe you’d better go to New York
just now, George.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’ve got to,” George said. “Dan, I want—I
want you to forgive me.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“For wanting to go to New York?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No. For ever introducing you to my sister.
Your mother wasn’t at home this afternoon, and at
three o’clock Lena left for New York.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“She did?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes. Your chauffeur took her to the train.
She told him—Dan, she told him to say she wouldn’t
be back, and she took Henry with her.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Wait a minute!” Dan passed his hand over his
forehead, and uttered a confused and plaintive sound
of laughter. “Just a minute,” he said apologetically.
“There’s a good deal kind of seems to’ve hit
me all at once. I guess I’ll have to go kind of slow
takin’ it in. You say Lena says she isn’t comin’
back home?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“She had the kindness to tell the chauffeur to say
so,” George replied bitterly.</p>

<p class="pindent">“And Henry——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Henry went with her.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I guess then I better go after him,” Dan said,
and he rose; but immediately sank back in his chair.
“I don’t know if I’d be able to go on your train,
though. I expect maybe I need a good night’s
sleep, first. I——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Will you leave it to me?” George asked sharply.
“Will you just leave it to me?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You mean gettin’ them to come home?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“ ‘Them!’ ” George said. “I’m not sure that you
need my sister here any longer. I don’t think you
ever needed her very much. But you do want
your son, and if you’ll leave it to me, I think I can
bring him. Will you, Dan?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I guess I’ll have to—just now,” Dan answered,
with a repetition of his apologetic laugh. “It’s all
seemed to’ve kind of hit me at once, as it were,
George. I’m afraid what I need’s a good night’s
sleep. I’m afraid I’ll have to leave it to you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’ll bring him!” McMillan promised. “I’ll have
him back here with me four days from now.”</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XXX</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="dropcap">H</span>E MADE this promise with an angrily confident
determination to fulfil it, but the
next few days were to teach him that he
had not yet learned all there was to know about his
sister. When he forced his way to an interview with
her in her rooms in the hotel to which she had gone
in New York, she laughed at his fury.</p>

<p class="pindent">“<span class="it">Why</span> haven’t I been a good wife to him?” she
asked. “I’ve spent quite a number of years in
purgatory, trying to stick to what I undertook
when he married me! Oh, yes, I know you like the
place, George; and I don’t challenge your viewpoint.
But I have my own, and, whether it’s right or not,
it’s mine and I can’t get rid of it. I suffer by it, and
I have to live by it—and to me the place has always
been a purgatory. It’s interesting to you, but it’s
hideous to me. You like the people;—to you they
seem intelligent and friendly. To me they’re intrusive
barbarians with unbearable voices. I stood
it at first because I had to; I didn’t have anywhere
else to go, and I did care for Dan. Then I kept on
standing it because I’d got the habit, I suppose,
and because it’s hard to get the courage to break
away. Well, thank Heaven, something’s given me
the courage at last. I was always just on the very
verge of it, and the trouble about Henry pushed me
over. I’ve perished for years because I couldn’t get
a breath of art; I haven’t lived——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You could have!” he cried. “With such a
man——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Dan? Good heavens! I might go on living with
a man, even after I’d stopped caring for him, if he
still cared for me; but it’s years since I realized absolutely
that neither of us cared for the other. I
knew then I’d have to do this some day.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“And how beautifully you did do it!” her brother
exclaimed. “His mother told me about your screaming
and storming at Dan after he brought that miserable
boy home. Do you think I didn’t understand?
You <span class="it">wanted</span> a quarrel to justify your going, so that
the real reason wouldn’t be suspected. You’d seen
that singing <span class="it">beef</span> again, and you meant to see him
<span class="it">again</span>—oh, I kept near you that night, and I read
you, every instant! You haven’t fooled me about
what gave you the ‘courage,’ Lena! It was indeed
‘the breath of art,’ old girl, and not ‘the trouble
about Henry!’ You made that quarrel with Dan
deliberately. It was to cover what you weren’t
thoroughbred enough to face. You weren’t honest
enough to——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“At least I’m honest enough to tell you that
you’re wasting your breath,” Lena said coolly.
“You want to take Henry home with you, but he
doesn’t care to go. He behaved idiotically there—it
<span class="it">isn’t</span> a good place for him—and of course, under
the circumstances, he’s embarrassed about going
back. He wants to stay with me just now, and
he’ll do what I tell him. You can’t take him back
with you, but if you’ll obtain a proper allowance
for me, or a settlement, from my husband, I’ll arrange
later for Henry to spend a part of his time
with his father. That’s absolutely the best I’ll
do, and you’d better run back and make it quite
clear to Dan. I bear him no ill will, and I’ll be
perfectly fair with him on the terms I’ve just mentioned.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Her brother’s bitterness with her was not abated;
but to effect his purpose he tried more reasonable
persuasions, and when these were unavailing, raged
again. All he did was useless; he could neither
shake her nor exert the slightest influence upon
Henry, though he continued the siege for three days
over the four that he had promised. Then he returned,
a defeated but fuming negotiator, to report
his failure. His final instructions from his sister
were to make it quite clear to Dan that she bore him
no ill will and wished him well.</p>

<p class="pindent">But when George reached the old house of the Oliphants,
driving there directly from the train, he was
told that he could not make her message clear to
her husband; that he could not make anything clear
to him.</p>

<p class="pindent">Harlan took the dismayed traveller into the library.
“The doctor says the trouble is there isn’t
anything to build up a resistance,” Harlan said.
“You see Dan’s never taken any care of his health—‘too
busy,’ of course—and he’s exhausted his vitality.
He caught a fearful cold going round in the
rain hunting for that precious boy of his, and instead
of staying in bed and nursing himself, he was hustling
all over the place in a drizzle the next morning. He
was all run-down to start with, and his system
couldn’t afford it. At least, that’s what they told us
after the consultation yesterday afternoon.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Consultation?” McMillan repeated blankly,
though Harlan’s manner had already prepared him
for words worse than this.</p>

<p class="pindent">Harlan sighed audibly, and shook his head.
“Both lungs are congested, they told us early this
morning. He can’t——” He went to the bay window
and looked down at the slightly frayed upholstery
of the easy-chair it had once been his wont
to occupy there. “Well, at your age and mine we’ve
had experience of sickness enough to know that nobody
can stand <span class="it">that</span> long.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes,” McMillan groaned. “I suppose so.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I think we won’t tell him you’ve got back,”
Harlan said. “He’s asked about it every now and
then—wants to know if you’ve brought Henry yet.
It’ll be better to let him keep on expecting him than
to tell him you’ve come back alone. I telegraphed
you after the consultation, but by that time you’d
already left New York, of course.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes; it didn’t reach me.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Then, for a time, neither of them found more to
say. Harlan, near the window, stared out into the
smoke haze that a cloudy day held down upon the
city; McMillan sat frowning at the floor, and the
room was vaguely noisy with a confusion of sounds
from outdoors: hammerings and clatterings of steel
where buildings were going up; the rending of timbers
and crashes and shoutings where they were going
down; the uproar of ponderous trucks grinding by
upon the brick-paved cross street to the south, so that
the strong old house trembled with the subterranean
communication of their vibrations—all to the incessantly
rasped accompaniment of motor signals
on the avenue.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Isn’t this a hell to be sick in?” Harlan asked,
turning abruptly to McMillan. “We couldn’t raise
the windows to give him air without giving him this
infernal smoke that makes him cough harder. And
the noise—there’s hardly a respite from it all night
long! When the workmen go home the joy-riders
and the taxis keep it up till daylight. He was too
sick to be taken to a hospital or——” He interrupted
himself with a desperate laugh. “We almost
had to! Yesterday morning the servants called me,
and I found the house full of men; they’d brought
trucks right across the lawn, and started to work.
They’d come to wreck the house—to tear it down.
I told the foreman my brother was very sick, and he
said in that case we’d better take him to a hospital;
he had his orders from the contractor, and he was
going ahead! Some of his men were already on the
roof, making a horrible noise and tearing away the
slate—throwing it down into the yard under Dan’s
window. I had hard work to get rid of them; and
they left a great hole in the roof when they went.
My heaven! when such things happen how’s anybody
ever to see any <span class="it">meaning</span> in life?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t know!” George groaned. “I don’t see
much meaning in anything—not after what you’ve
told me about Dan’s condition.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“McMillan, I don’t see a bit of meaning to the
whole miserable business. Here’s my brother spent
all his days and nights—and all his strength and
health—just blindly building up a bigger confusion
and uproar that smashes him; and then when he <span class="it">is</span>
smashed, it keeps on bothering him and disturbing
him—yes, and choking him!—on his very deathbed!
I know your theory that it all means power, and that
power may be thought beautiful—but it can’t last,
because nothing can last. So what the deuce is the
good of it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">And when the other, groaning again, said that he
didn’t know, Harlan groaned, too—then crossed the
room to where George sat in a crumpled attitude,
touched him lightly on the shoulder, and turned
away. “You’re a good fellow, McMillan, and you
haven’t anything in the world to reproach yourself
with. I don’t think he’s minded Lena’s going away;
he hasn’t spoken of her at all, and I really believe
he doesn’t think of her. Your record with Dan is
all right, but I’ve been realizing that mine isn’t.
I could have made success easier for him long ago;
though I don’t reproach myself so much with that,
because he <span class="it">did</span> get his success—for a while, and that’s
all anybody gets—and he enjoyed it all the more for
having got it without help. What I’m thinking
about this morning: I seem to have spent a great
part of my life saying, ‘What’s the good of it?’ as I
did just now, and it’s my brother’s work I’ve been
saying it about. I’ve always been ‘superior’—and
I’ll never be different. I was born so, I believe,
and didn’t see it in time. The most I’ve ever
actually <span class="it">done</span> was to help organize a dilettante musical
club! And Dan—well, I hope it’s as you intimated
the other night on Martha’s porch—I hope
Dan’s been too busy to be much bothered about my
‘judgments!’ I’ve been just nothing; but even if he
falls, he’s at least been a branch of the growing tree,
though we don’t know where it’s growing to, or why.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No,” McMillan said. “We don’t know anything.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Harlan had begun to pace up and down the room.
“I didn’t understand that Dan was in real trouble
financially,” he said. “He’d been on the edge so
often—I talked about it, but I’d got to thinking of
it as a permanent thing for him to be on the edge. I
didn’t realize he might actually fall <span class="it">off</span>—not until
that little Jew friend of his came to me the other
morning and <span class="it">made</span> me realize it. Well, there’s one
thing I can be thankful for: I can be grateful that all
I thought of, for once in my life, was that I was
Dan’s brother!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Harlan?” Martha Shelby’s voice called him
softly from the stairway.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes?” He turned to the door, explaining,
“Dan may want me—he sends for me to come in
sometimes. Perhaps you might——” He paused.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes,” George said, rising. “I’ll go and wire
her. She might want to come. At any rate
she’ll send Henry. Then I’ll come back here.
I’ll be downstairs in this room, if there’s anything——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’ll let you know,” Harlan said, and he went
upstairs to Martha.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Your mother’s been with him,” she whispered.
“She and the nurse said he seemed to be trying to
ask for somebody, but he was so weak, and his
cough troubled him so much——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’ll go in and see,” he said; but he came back to
her a few moments later, and told her it was for her
that Dan was asking.</p>

<p class="pindent">She went into his room, sat by his bed, and put
her hand gently over his on the coverlet. “Why,
you’re better, Dan,” she said, as he turned his head
and looked at her with eyes that cleared and grew
brighter, for he recognized her.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Think so?” He spoke distinctly though his voice
was weak. “Well, maybe—maybe. I did hope——”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, Dan?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I did hope I wouldn’t have to be sick very long.
I’ve got so much to do. I’ve done a good deal of
work, but I haven’t ever <span class="it">got</span> anywhere with it,
much. There’s a mighty big lot I’ll have to begin
over, Martha. You don’t”—he paused, and laughed
faintly. “You don’t—you don’t suppose God’s used
me and now He’s goin’ to throw me away, do you?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, no, no!” she said, making her voice cheerful.
“You’ve only got to go ahead with what you began
long ago.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No,” he said reflectively. “No; it isn’t exactly
like that, Martha. Not exactly, that is. You see
right now I’m a pretty complete failure—yes, I am.
I’m a pretty bad failure.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You? You’re not!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, I am,” he returned feebly. “I better face
it, Martha, or I’ll never get anywhere. They’ve got
Ornaby away from me——” His cough interrupted
him; but he patiently let it have its way; and then,
in a tone in which a wondering incredulity seemed
to merge with resignation, he said, “Yes, sir; they
did get Ornaby away from me!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But you’ll get it back, Dan?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Think so? Well, maybe—maybe,” he said indulgently.
“But things do look like it came pretty
close to a failure, Martha. It <span class="it">would</span> have been
one, too—it’d have been a bankruptcy, and I believe
I just couldn’t have stood that—but, well, anyhow
it wasn’t that bad, thanks to Harlan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Martha’s eyes widened. “Do you mean—do you
mean Harlan helped you?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It was mighty good of him,” Dan said. “My
friends went to him and asked him if he wouldn’t let
us have some money on a second mortgage on the
new house. Harlan dug out all the securities he
could sell for ready cash and he brought the money
to me down at Sam Kohn’s office. I must make it
up to him some day. If it hadn’t been for that I’d
have gone clean under!” He laughed huskily.
“Everybody’d have known I was a failure for sure,
if it hadn’t been for that, Martha.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But you’re not!” she insisted. “You mustn’t
keep talking such nonsense, Dan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It isn’t—it isn’t exactly nonsense.” The cough
stopped him again; but he went on, while it still
troubled him: “I’m a failure, Martha. I’ve been a
failure in business—and a failure as a husband—and
a failure as a father. George McMillan hasn’t got
here with Henry yet, has he?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, dear; not yet.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Dan’s hand moved restlessly under hers, and she
released it. With a visible effort he rubbed his forehead,
a gesture of perplexity that hurt her and made
it difficult for her to retain her appearance of cheerfulness,
because this characteristic gesture brought
his boyhood so vividly to her memory. “I’ve just
<span class="it">got</span> to have Henry back,” he said. “I’ve got to get
him back so’s to do right by him. It isn’t—it isn’t
fair to a boy, Martha.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What isn’t?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Do you remember my grandmother Savage?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Of course. No one could forget her, Dan.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, I guess not. Well, she”—he shook his head,
and half coughed, half laughed—“she was right
about some things. My! but wouldn’t she be sayin’,
‘Didn’t I tell you so?’ if she knew what’s happened
to my poor Henry! I’ve been a terrible failure with
Henry, Martha.” He looked patiently at her as she
denied this; and then he said abruptly: “Why, I’ve
even been a failure with <span class="it">you</span>, Martha!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“That’s the absurdest thing you’ve said, dear!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No. I’ve been a failure as a friend, too. I let
Lena fret me out of comin’ in to see you when you’d
been away that long stretch. I had no business to
pay any attention to her. You see—why, <span class="it">you</span> always
really liked me better than she did, Martha!”</p>

<p class="pindent">He spoke as if it were a discovery just made; and
she assented to it, taking his hand again. “Yes,
Dan. I’ve always liked you better than anybody.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Have you?” he said inquiringly. “Well, I’m
right glad to hear it. I’m right glad to hear it,
Martha.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, dear. I always have.”</p>

<p class="pindent">He closed his eyes, but she felt a faint pressure
upon her hand from his, and sat still for a time,
looking at him with fond eyes that grew frightened
as the pressure upon her fingers relaxed. She was
not sure, for the moment, that he was still breathing;
and she looked a terrified inquiry at the grave nurse
who sat on the other side of the bed. The nurse
shook her head, forming with her lips the word,
“Sleeping”; but Dan opened his eyes again.</p>

<p class="pindent">“It’s curious,” he said, “the way things are. A
fellow goes along, and everything seems to run all
right, year after year—he can hear a little kind of
grindin’ noise, maybe, sometimes, or something
seems to slip, but he patches it up and doesn’t let it
scare him—he keeps goin’ right along and everything
seems to be workin’ about as usual—and then one
thing goes wrong—and then another—and then all of
a sudden the whole works pile up on top of him, and
he’s down under the heap!” He took his hand again
from Martha’s, and again passed it tremulously over
his forehead in the old familiar gesture. “Well—maybe
I could start in again if I can get over what
ails me. I expect I need a good night’s rest first,
though. Maybe I can sleep now.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Martha went tiptoeing out, and through the hall
to the room that had been Lena’s. Harlan was there,
sitting close beside his mother. “He wants to sleep,”
Martha told them, but had no sooner spoken than
Dan’s renewed coughing was heard—a sound that
racked the sick man’s mother. She shivered and
gasped, and then, as the convulsion became fainter,
went out trembling into the hall.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Harlan,” Martha said, “why didn’t you tell me
you tried to help Dan—at last?”</p>

<p class="pindent">He rose, looking annoyed. “I didn’t do anything
that was in the slightest degree a sacrifice,” he said.
“I don’t want you to misunderstand it. I never
helped him when I thought it would be thrown away,
and I didn’t this time. He made over the new house
to me, and I guess Lena’ll sign the deed; she’ll have
to. In time it’ll probably be worth all I gave for it.
I wasn’t going to see the name of Oliphant dragged
through all the miserable notoriety of bankruptcy—and
there was something besides.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes?” she said. “What was that?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, a pack of old money-vultures were after
him, and after all Dan’s my brother.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, he is!” Martha said. She began to cry
bitterly, but silently; then suddenly she put her
arms about him. “He’s still your brother, Harlan!
We can say that yet;—he’s just in that room down
the hall there—he’s not gone away—he’s <span class="it">still</span> your
brother, Harlan!”</p>

<p class="pindent">But even as Martha spoke, Mrs. Oliphant, looking
through the door of the sick room, cried out in terror,
then rushed to her son’s bedside. Dan had unexpectedly
lifted himself almost half upright; he seemed
to struggle to rise; and in his eyes, wide-opened, but
seeing neither his mother nor the nurse, there was a
look of startled incredulity—the look of one who suddenly
recognizes, to his utter astonishment, an old
acquaintance long since disappeared but now abruptly
returned.</p>

<p class="pindent">A moment later the uncontrolled sobbing of his
mother let Harlan know that he no longer had a
brother in the room down the hall.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XXXI</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="dropcap">T</span>HE war halted the wrecking of National
Avenue, but not for long. Until the soldiers
came home and the country could begin to
get back into its great stride again, groups of the old,
thick-walled, big-roomed houses were permitted to
survive; and although it was a survival doomed, and
the dignity of the dignified old things had begun to
appear somewhat ridiculous, since they were smeared
with the smoke-fog and begirt with automobile warehouses
and salesbuildings and noisy garages and
repair shops, and every other kind of shop and office,
yet here and there was the semblance—or, at least,
the reminder—of a fine, ample, and mannerly old
street that had once been the glory of its town.</p>

<p class="pindent">But when the great heydays came, following the
collapse of the war “expansion,” and the country
took up its dropped trades again, and renewed with
furious and reckless energy its suppressed building,
and, instead of getting back into its old great stride,
set forth in a new stride gigantic beyond all its striding
aforetime, then indeed the old avenue perished
utterly, and nothing was left even to hint what it
had been, or to tell its noble story. Old Hickory
Shelby’s house was the last to go;—the stone casing
of his tall front doorway was the last of all the relics.
Even when the rest of the house was flat, hauled
away with the fountain swan and the cast-iron fence
in dumping wagons and in the trucks of junk-dealers,
the doorway was allowed to remain in place above
the ruins of the veranda; and for several weeks stood
forth against the setting sun like a fragment on the
Roman Campagna. But in time it fell, too, as the
Roman fragments will.</p>

<p class="pindent">When it was gone the old hickory stick was gone,
too. He had declined to the last to be an ornament
of his daughter’s fireside; and she never knew that
she owed her husband’s ownership of the “new
house” to her father’s insistence on a “conservative
policy” for the bank of which he was one of the
directors. Old Hickory’s thoughts were his own, as
his ways were his own; and what he knew about himself
he kept to himself, as he once or twice with a dry
crackling informed his daughter.</p>

<p class="pindent">The new house was a white house, and it remained
almost white; for the smoke reached it but thinly,
and in northern Ornaby, where there were other
large white houses among the groves Dan Oliphant
had preserved, the people struggled successfully to
keep the curse under. Shrubberies lived there, not
suffocated; it was a place where faces stayed clean,
children throve, and lilacs bloomed in transparent
air.</p>

<hr class="tbk100" />

<p class="pindent">Martha drove downtown, late one afternoon of a
cool day at the end of a green May, to bring her
husband home from a directors’ meeting at the bank;
for Harlan, in her interest, had inherited his father-in-law’s
position; and, as they rolled homeward, checked
now and then in the jam of traffic that filled the whole
length of National Avenue, she spoke of the prevalence
of “Sheridans,” those excellently serviceable
cars.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Rather!” Harlan said. “All that old rascal had
to do when he got control of the ‘Ornaby Four’ was to
put back the old clutch and change the name.
They’re all over the country. Dan would have made
a great fortune if he’d lived and could have held
on.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t think he’d mind missing the fortune
much,” she said. “I wish he could know how many
people are riding in his cars, though. He’d like to
know about that.”</p>

<p class="pindent">They passed a “gas-station,” a flamboyantly
painted bit of carnival, with an automobile warehouse
and salesroom, and then an apartment house
built round a begrimed courtyard, for its neighbours;
and Harlan sighed. “It’s hard to imagine you and
I once lived where these things are, isn’t it?” he said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, some of it’s pretty ugly.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It’s all ugly. It’s all hideous!” he said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, not all.” And when they had left the
avenue behind them, and reached the district of the
bungalows and small wooden houses, she showed him
gardens that he was forced to admit were “pretty.”
But when they got beyond this, to where had been the
broad stretches of woodland and meadow that Dan
had planned for his “restricted residence district,”
she insisted on her husband’s consent to the word
“beautiful”; for the woodland was still there, so that
one could hardly see the houses; and long hedges of
bridal-wreath were flowering everywhere, as if snow
had fallen upon the shrubberies.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Hasn’t beauty come, Harlan?” she said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, it’s well enough here,” he grumbled, as they
swept into their own deep-shaded driveway.</p>

<p class="pindent">Then they descended at white stone steps that led
them up and out upon a terrace, and there they
found the other member of their household sitting
placidly—“to enjoy the bridal-wreath,” she said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Isn’t it rather chilly for you outdoors, mother?”
Harlan asked; for she was now so fragile that she
seemed almost transparent. “Don’t you want to go
in?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, not just yet,” she said. “I was just sitting
here thinking how your father would have enjoyed
all this. The town was pleasant when he and I were
young, but of course it was never anything like this.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No,” Harlan said, with satire. “I should say it
wasn’t!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It’s a great change,” the old lady continued.
“I don’t suppose my mother could have believed
how beautiful it would come to be.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No,” Harlan said, with a short laugh. “I don’t
believe she could!”</p>

<p class="pindent">She overlooked his sarcasm, or was unaware of it,
for she went on: “I don’t suppose <span class="it">I</span> could believe
how wonderful everything will be when my grandson
gets to be as old as you are, Harlan.” But this
thought made her wander from the subject. “I wish
Lena would let him come home some day; I do want
to see him;—I don’t want to go till I’ve seen him
again.” Her voice became querulous, and then, with
a habit she had formed in her old age, she began to
talk more to herself than to her son and daughter-in-law,
but for the most part in indistinct whispers.
Her subject was still Henry, who had done well in
the war, had been twice “decorated,” and now lived
in Paris with his mother. The old lady murmured
of him and of Lena for a little time; then fell into a
reverie.</p>

<p class="pindent">Harlan joined his wife at the terrace wall. “Well,
you’ve got a supporter in mother. <span class="it">She</span> seems to
think it’s beautiful.” He pointed upward to where
an opening through the foliage of tall beech trees left
a vista of the sky; and there, against the evening blue,
the thinning end of a plume of smoke, miles long, was
visible. “Do you, really? Even that?” he asked.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Dan must have thought so,” she said. “I think
he felt something in it that neither you nor I can
understand.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I think maybe he did,” Harlan agreed. “Then
why couldn’t he at least have lived to see the fruition
of what he planted, since he loved it and it was beautiful
to him? Why should he be ‘dead and forgotten?’ ”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Listen!” Martha said. She was still looking up
at the smoke against the sky, so far above the long
masses of flowering bridal-wreath that bordered the
terrace where she and her husband stood. “Listen!
That murmur of the city down yonder—why, it’s
almost his voice!”</p>
